Hey, everybody, it is Chris with the Running Rogue podcast. I am here with Steve. And today we're going to be talking about training again. This is going to be episode two of our series on training principles. We started our very first podcast, episode one, where we talked about our overall rogue training principles and how that ties to Arthur Lyddiard's principles. Then we came back with episode seven and talked about the first principle in the context of training that we talk about, which is that miles matter. So we encourage you to check out episode seven. Today, episode 10, we're going to be talking about principles two and three in that training framework, which we'll get into in a second. Before we dive into our main topic, we're going to be, as always, talking about some current events in the running world. As we continue on this path to making all of you track and field fans. And today's topic...

If it kills us, we're going to do it.

Today's topic is one I think everybody can relate to, because we're going to be talking about probably the most recognized track and field athlete, which is Usain Bolt. We talked about him on our last episode in his Nitro Athletics attempt to reinvigorate track and field. Well, this week, he announced that the London World Championships this summer will be his last meet. And so he says he's going to be retiring, going out on top, as he says. And so we're going to talk a little bit about Bolt and where he fits in the context of track and field and the discussions we've had in the past on who is the greatest of all time. And I think it's easy to argue that Bolt is certainly the greatest sprinter of all time, but I want to talk about how he fits in the broader pantheon of runners. Across all events, before we dive into that and bring Steve into the discussion, I wanted to first share a personal Usain Bolt story, which is that I went to the had the privilege to go to the 2008 Olympics in Beijing. And by sheer luck, Amy and I, my wife and I ended up on the 10th row in the lower level, directly across the track from the finish line during the 100 meter final when he broke the world record in Beijing. And we got completely lucky. We ended up picking up tickets sort of last minute because of a long story from the direct site. And we ended up 10th row right down by the track for that event.

Is that like the start of the 1500 meter where the start of the 1500 meter is?

Exactly. And so we were straight across from where he would finish that race. And we had been to every session of track and field while we were there, as I'm a fanatic on this stuff. And Drew, I forced Amy to come watch the, for example, 100 meter prelims. But this is where I really, that event generally is where I really understand the value of watching every preliminary round, even in the 100 where you have four rounds and some of those first rounds are kind of silly because you have a ton of people that really don't necessarily deserve to be there. But that's one of the events that gets a lot of people because every country can bring one athlete to one event. And so Bolt, we saw him in the first round, second round, third round, and then the final. And in the first round, he ran about, sprinted about 40 meters before he shut it down and jogged to the finish. And then the second round was maybe 60 meters, then about 80 meters. And then we all saw him run in the final as well, where he shut it down with about 10 meters to go. Well, that final in the Bird's Nest, it was a sold out venue. Everybody had really been waiting for Bolt to come out and do his thing. It's always the last race of the night, and there had been a lot of talk about him breaking the world record. He had looked really impressive in the prelim rounds, as I just mentioned. And so the track is packed. Everybody's buzzing. He comes out, does his thing, where he gets so playful and fun. He gets the crowd involved with his dancing and stuff. So everybody was, all that anticipation was building. The event happens, and in a lot of ways, it's different than watching it on TV. If you're there in person, because you have one vantage point, versus the TV gives you that close view the whole way.

And it moves.

And it moves with him.

The camera moves with him.

But when you're there, it doesn't move with you. You're just watching, and it happens so fast that you almost don't even know what's going on. But they ran the event. He obviously won. The crowd went crazy. He kept sprinting around the curve. Ended up pretty close to where we were sitting as he was celebrating. And the crowd, of course, was going crazy. But then they showed the replay on the big screen. And about that same time, they flashed that he did actually achieve the world record. So everybody saw that and went nuts again. But then they showed the replay on the big screen there. And that's when we all in person realized that he'd basically run 90 meters of the race, shut it down, started celebrating, and still set the world record. So for a very split second, as we all watched that, it got quiet as everybody's draw dropped in awe of what he had just done and how easy it looked to set the world record. And so for a very split second, that stadium, which had been just a split second prior, going absolutely nuts, went deathly quiet for a beat, just a heartbeat, and then went crazy again. And that single moment is probably the coolest moment in sports I've ever seen in person, just that moment where you had 100, 000 fans quiet in awe of this guy.

Yeah, it shut the world down.

Yeah, exactly. So that to me in person was really cool. But if you go back, obviously most people know Bolt, but they may not know some of the stats. He's obviously the 100-meter and the 200-meter world record holder. But here's a stat for me that's most impressive. If you look at his results in championship meets, Olympics and world championships, from 2008 to 2016 in Rio, across three Olympics and four world championships, seven major worldwide championship events, he won 20 out of 21 gold medals across the 100-meter, 200-meter, and the 4x1. So basically, he was 20 for 21 across those premier sprint championships. The only time he didn't win was in 2011, where he false started in the 100 final and got disqualified.

Well, one of those officially has been taken away from him.

True.

But we can leave that alone.

He just lost the two 2008 4x1 because his teammate was busted for doping. But essentially, he was the winner on 20 out of 21 championships in nine straight years across seven global championships. I mean, that's unheard of in any event, much less than the sprints, and especially in the 100, where in a lot of ways, sometimes a crap shoot. And so let's talk about Bolt's dominance. Where does he fit in the pantheon of great track and field athletes of all time?

I mean, I think that if you take all categories, because the last time we talked about the GOAT, which is the greatest of all time, that's the appellation that is typically used, we've talked about it in the context of distance runners, which seems to be our main interests. But Chris and I are both track and field fans from everything as we talked about before, from the javelin all the way through the vault to the shot to the sprints. And I do think as you laid it out there, as you lay that case out there, it's pretty hard not to see how much that domination in what I would call just about the hardest events to pull it off in. Because the question of chance, in a race that's only ten seconds long, the number of things that can go wrong that will change everything is just exponentially greater than anywhere else. A mistimed start, not come from behind quite fast enough. In the relay events, the domination that Jamaica has had in that 4x1 is just mind boggling. I think some of that is the factor of the United States not having the ability to get the fricking baton around it. I think we should have been as... Those records maybe not should be so sparkling if we actually knew how to get the baton around the track. But anyway, I do think that you're right that as the greatest of all time in track and field, he's if not the greatest right there. I can't conceive of anybody else better just because of the sheer difficulty of pulling those feats off in all those championship races.

Plus, the other thing I think you have to throw in is his appeal. As somebody who's brought more fans to the sport than maybe anybody ever, because of his style, his panache, his confidence, but also his playfulness, he's just fun to watch.

Especially at the crucial time where so many other parts of our sport are being lambasted and bashed by the media because of drugs and the sheer focus on what quote unquote cheating is. Now, I don't want anybody to sit here and think that I think it's okay to dope. I'm not saying that. What I'm saying is that the fact that the dopers can take so much attention away from what's happening out on the track, and Bolt is a huge bright spot and one that nearly everyone in the world knows. I mean, he's probably the most recognized sporting person in the world. I don't know who else you could say even in football, soccer, that there could be another person. Maybe Messi. Right.

So you bring up the doping. During his heyday, Bolt has seen lots of his competitors go out in attempts to try to match him between Gatlin and Gay and Blake. And so, and of course, there's Asafa Powell who there's been speculation about. So you've had others trying to compete with him that have potentially gone to dubious means. And so people often ask me, as someone who is a student of the sport and a student of doping in the sport, do you think Bolt's clean? And you know me, I'm a cynic. So most of the time, if there's crazy performances happening, then I'm one to be skeptical. But Bolt's someone that I believe in 100% for a couple reasons. One, because if you look at his track record, he has performed at the level he performs now at every age group. He's set age group records from the earliest they start tracking that all the way to now. So he's done it with consistency no matter his age. Then the second is if you just look at the physics. And there's some pretty good articles out there. If you Google search them on the physics of Bolt running, because he's 6'5", and a lot of these other sprinters are 5'11", max, he's got 5 to 6 inches on most of the other major sprinters. And so he's taking on average 41 steps per 100 meters, whereas as his competitors on average are taking 44 to 45 steps. So he's taken 3 to 4 fewer steps per 100 meters. And if you're able to do that with the same stride rate, you're going to win. And so he's got the physics on his side and the height and the geometry on his side as well that tells me that what we're seeing is real. He just happens to be a freak of nature. And then the third thing I point to is if you look at his coach and the group he sort of associated with in Jamaica, it's always been above board. You've had some questionable things happening in Jamaican sprinting, but that's with other coaches, other groups.

Well, Johan Blake did train with them and with him as a coach. They were a coach.

For a little bit.

Correct. And so there are arguments about what was happening in 08 when all that happened. But I'm with you, Chris. I think that this is one of the clear indications of being clean. There's no proof. I do think it would be a death knell to our sport if he did come out as being doping, because I think it would just really... It would either do one of two things. It would either be a death knell to people's interest in the sport, or it would tell everybody, would just say, forget about it like we do in cycling. Let it be what it is. It is what it is. I don't think there's a person who watches the Tour de France or watches cycling that thinks that there are very many clean or that there are very many people not cheating because of the things that are happening out there. But I'm with you. I mean, he's a freak. I mean, he's an absolute freak. And not only is he a freak physically, but he's a freak in the way that he approaches his game on race day, which is what has made his appeal so great within the whole world in terms of people watching him dance and have fun and do his bolt move that he does at the end of it, the lightning bolt move. But that kind of a loose approach is one that is not very heavily present in any sporting event that, well, especially in track and field. Track and field is definitely sort of the serious person in sport in terms of not joking and jacking around. Maybe the high jumpers do a little bit of that. But I mean, even the decathlon, those guys are dead serious from start to finish, the 1500ers, there's not a lot of that super relaxed people will put a smile on their face when you see the camera go by them as they're on the starting line, but they immediately shift going back into game on mode. And Blake would be in that mode. He probably did that when he was seven years old and racing in the dirt lots of Jamaica doing whatever he did. He's probably the same way. So yeah, I mean, it's just we're going to miss him when he's gone. I do want to make one point about his retirement. He did say he was going to retire after 2012. He's made these statements before about when he was going to retire. I do think that as the most recognized person in the sport and one of the most recognized people in the world, his ability to create lucrative financial opportunities beyond the sport are probably as great and maybe even greater if he was able to be not in the serious training mode because we do know he likes to party.

Yes. Okay, last question before we turn to our main topic. This has been the topic of debate on many of letsrun.com message board, which is that if Bolt were to run the mile, how would he do?

Number one, he wouldn't run the mile.

He wouldn't want to, certainly, but some people speculate. Can he break five in the mile is some of the speculation out there.

Okay, so just go and watch. This is what I would ask you to do. Go and watch the Decathlon 1500 meter. Now, in Bolt's favor, the Decathlon 1500 meter is run after nine other events. And these guys have to be able to throw a shot put. But those guys can break five. There's guys there that can break five. And they do it tired, right? So yes, he can break five. I don't think there's any question that physiologically he can break five. But just like Trey Hardy in the Decathlon, just because Trey Hardy can break five doesn't mean he's going to break five. And if he doesn't have to break five to get what he wants, guess what? He's not going to break five because he couldn't give two shits about that. So it's only the Let's Run pundits that are speculating too wildly about what Bolt might do. We can't even get Bolt to run 400 meters on a 4x4. Just saying nothing about this idea if I'm running a 1500 or a mile.

And he used to run a lot of 400s growing up, actually. I was looking at the history on that.

Yeah, his coach made him do that. When he switched to Glenn Mills, who was his coach in 2004, his coach thought he would be a 400 meter runner. In fact, he wanted him to move to that event, but Bolt did not have any interest whatsoever. I think you want to talk about an easy way for Bolt to have expanded his medal count. I mean, because Jamaica is always right there, but they just have always missed that final... They needed one more leg. Where they're dominant in the 4x1, they're not so dominant in the 4x4. And that guy could have run scratch leg, the leadoff leg, in a way that would just put the race in a completely different place. Just thinking about the places you could put him on a 4x4 is really intriguing about where you might put him in the placement on that 4. Because those of you who don't know track and field very well, in the 4x4, where you position, as well as a 4x1, the person that you have in the position you have them in is really critical. And it could be the same four people juggled in different spots for 400 meters, could completely change the way that the race goes down. I had the benefit of having a mentor in Bev Kearney, who is the absolute, in my opinion, one of the greatest 400 meter coaches in the world, and certainly one of the most amazing 400 meter 4x4 coaches in the world, always knowing how to get those kids up and have them positioned in just the right place, taking their strengths and weaknesses into account. So maybe we'll get that at this World Championship. Maybe there will be a chance that he'll pop out of 4x4. If he does, I'll just die.

Don't hold your breath. I would suggest, if Bolt were listening, that if he was thinking about spicing up his Nitro events, if he were to run the Elimination Mile, that would be interesting.

A whole lot of people would watch. Instead of just standing there on the sidelines clapping them on, as we saw in the last one.

All right, so with that, we say farewell to Bolt after London. We will definitely miss him, and the sport will miss him. There will be a big gap, as we mentioned with Ashton Eaton, on who will take that ball and run with it, so to speak, as the next big track and field star. We're going to move into our main topic today, where again, we're following up on our series on training principles. As I said at the top, we started with our episode one, where we talked about our five principles for training and how that fits into our programming. Then we followed that up with episode seven, where we talked about the first principle, which is that miles matter, and getting that volume is really important. Today we're going to talk about principles two and three. Number two is the importance of feeling-based training, and number three is basically that every day has a purpose and that you need to modulate your efforts from day to day in order to get an optimal result. We're going to walk through the details on both of those, starting with the second here on feeling-based training. And so what this comes down to, if you put it simply, Steve, is listening to your body. So explain what that means.

So listening to your body is, as in the parlance that we've heard people talk about before, something can be very simple but not very easy. And listening to your body is certainly something that requires a lot of practice. You know, I like to think about this kind of in the sense of, even though this analogy isn't exactly right, some of those science people among us who get these things better than I do, this idea of homeostasis versus equilibrium, and like the idea of homeostasis being looking at the entire internal system, like what's going on entirely within the system, and equilibrium is sort of like trying to figure out all the little different pieces and parts of the body that are going on within balance and how those are balanced out. In my mind, this isn't homeostasis versus equilibrium, more it's how can you keep balance or that equilibrium within the overall system of the body. And so it's really critical, in my opinion, the most critical is getting this balance right. And that has to be filtered through the most important lens, which is personal experience. Because what I think might be easy or hard, or what I think my body may be able to do or not be able to do, or my body is indicating to me is difficult, might be very different for where you're at in your positioning. And also, it will always vary based on the objectives in a workout, the objectives on a run. There's so many different variables that can get played in here. But what is very, very simple is that you have to actually pay attention to the information that's going on. That's physiological information from your toes all the way up to the top of your head, and also what's going on between one ear and the other ear in terms of the way that you're feeling those feelings and exhibiting those bodily feedback loops. Correct. And in essence, the other thing that's really important is to remember you can also replace the word feeling here, feeling-based training with effort-based training. We're going to get into a lot more of that later, but for those people who are a little bit weirded out by the touchy-feely idea of feeling-based, you can also just substitute effort in there if you want to as we continue to discuss.

We're talking about efforts, not emotions, so to speak.

Correct. Exactly.

But the overarching point here is that a lot of times we think of training in terms of paces. You think about workouts as I should do X number of miles at marathon pace, half marathon pace, 10K pace, 5K pace. We're often talking about workouts and runs in terms of paces, how fast you're going. But the main thing we're trying to convey here is that those paces don't actually matter that much. What matters is your efforts, because efforts and having sustained work at different effort levels, and we'll talk about what the different effort levels are, those efforts are what are actually helping you adapt and work through and improve. It's not the paces that are important, it's the efforts. And so the ability for you as an individual over time to understand what efforts are appropriate to get what benefit from an aerobic development or anaerobic development standpoint, that's what's important. And that's why this is really hard, because it's going to vary, as you said, depending on the workout, the time frame, an individual versus another individual, but it's also going to vary based on that person's stimuli from the day, how much they slept, how much stress they're under, how they're feeling generally, whether their legs are maybe tired from a strength workout or something the day before. And so there's lots of things that might cause those paces to change when the efforts might be the same. And it takes a mature athlete to understand how to read that and, as you said, listening to your body. So with that as context, let's talk a little bit about energy systems. And, you know, there's a lot of training literature out there about what, you know, and terminology that we're going to try to demystify here for you today. So when people talk about aerobic and anaerobic and threshold work, what do those things mean? So give us the breakdown, Steve, on what are the four basic energy systems and some of the terminology that are associated with efforts people are trying to achieve when they're training.

Cool, so let's first start with a really generic situation of just making sure that people understand when we talk about efforts. People will talk frequently about things being easy or being hard. So easy versus hard is this sort of very generic, overarching idea that's really important for people to pay attention to. And as you alluded to, Chris, what's happening in your day-to-day life is so essential in terms of determining what those easy versus hard efforts are in terms of a general, generic statement. Okay, moving very quickly to what Chris just asked me, which is what are the four basic energy systems. These are very specific things. I'm going to run through them really quickly. Those of you who have a pen and paper, you want to jot them down. You can, if not, you can listen to it repeatedly. It doesn't really matter. But basically, we're talking number one. These four energy systems fall into two categories. Those energy systems that are energy requiring or using oxygen, so they'll be called aerobic, and those energy systems that are creating energy without oxygen, which means lactic acid or the byproducts of trying to create oxygen but not having enough oxygen in the system to do so, begin to create byproducts that actually create lactic acid. So energy with oxygen, energy without oxygen. The energy with oxygen ones are aerobic conditioning, and aerobic conditioning is really simple. Your easy runs, your recovery runs, your long runs, even long run workouts, even steady state runs in the sense of steady state running being sort of really effort-based, long running or medium long running. Sometimes we do in our workouts, I'll say, I want everybody to go out for a 10-mile run today, but I want it to be steady, and steady means comfortable. And so you can run as fast as you want to run as long as you're staying in that comfortable zone. But aerobic conditioning means that we are not, the only way we're going to accumulate lactic acid or get into a position where we cross over a lactic threshold is if we go for so long that we run out of fuel and we don't have enough glycogen fuel to actually fuel what we're doing. So staying consistent with easy, easy, easy is pretty much where you're at with aerobic, with a little bit of fast running, a little bit of long run workouts, but the long run workouts aren't at paces that if you did very short bouts of that would be difficult at all. The next category is what we call aerobic power. Other folks call it aerobic capacity, maybe even aerobic strength, but it is different from conditioning. Conditioning is getting fitter at it. The power, the capacity, and the strength element means that you're actually doing what we would more commonly call interval work. So this is where the zone of VO2 max comes into play where people talk about the utilization or the uptake of oxygen in workouts. So VO2 max workouts, these are workouts that are in a pace zone somewhere between 5K pace all the way up to 10K pace, generally. They're typically intervals, they're typically repetitions, and they're usually those intervals are sitting at a recovery zone when you do your easy recovery at about equal to the time that you ran. So if you're doing 800-meter repeats in three minutes, you'll get a three-minute recovery. If you're doing 400-meter repeats in 80 seconds, you're getting an 80-second recovery. If you're doing five-minute bouts, you're getting five minutes of recovery because it's supposed to be equal to be sure that you get completely recovered. And we're really not trying to get your body any better at utilizing lactic energy. We're really trying to get you better at creating as much oxygen as possible to keep that from happening. So those are the first two aerobic ones, the ones that we use with energy. And the other two are the energy without oxygen. And for many of our listeners, these are a significantly less utilized part of our training methodologies, but 400-meter runners, 800-meter runners, 1500-meter runners, they use these systems far more. In our system at Rogue, we use them a little bit to make sure that we work on our efficiency and our economy and some other things, but we are not spending a lot of time working on immediately getting into a lactate state. We're brewing more of this aerobic stuff where our lactate gets developed after we've been running for a considerable period of time. So these workouts, these two categories are anaerobic conditioning, higher volumes or shorter intervals, done at basically 3K to 1 mile pace, and they're usually done with a pretty short rest. So this might be a workout like people do 10 times 400 at your mile pace. Very, very, very, very common workout that people do that way. And then in the other zone is anaerobic power, which our listeners, most people who are half marathon and marathon focused, they do almost absolutely none of this. In my cycling, I do it once, every once in a while, just to throw a little spice in there to make sure people know how to buffer lactic acid. But that's like getting seriously into lactate distress. And this is anaerobic power. It is super anaerobic, bleeding out of your ears, tasting pennies. Those of you who have done fast, hard, hill repeats, you're definitely getting into that sort of lactic power energy zone. So those are your four energy systems, aerobic conditioning, aerobic power. Those are using oxygen. And then the ones not using oxygen are anaerobic conditioning and anaerobic power.

So when we talk about those four, most people that might be listening are probably half marathon to marathon training, maybe 5K, 10K. And so I sort of think of these energy systems similar to muscles in the body. Like your aerobic system, sorry, your musculoskeletal system has different parts, different muscles, your quads, your biceps, your pecs, those sorts of things. And your aerobic system has different muscles too. And so when we think about those different energy systems, they're kind of like different muscles within your aerobic toolkit, from aerobic capacity to aerobic conditioning, and so forth. But for most people that are doing long-distance training, they're going to be focusing on the first two, right? Because that's where we're developing all those physiological elements we talked about in episode 7. We're adding mitochondria to your cell, you're adding capillaries to your muscles, you're improving your blood's ability to carry oxygen, your lung's ability to process it, and so forth.

And let's remember that we discussed also that many people as we start out, why we talked about Miles Matter, they're aerobic babies. So they need to spend so much time in that zone because they're not getting that oxygen in the way that you're talking about to those muscles appropriately, and you have to practice it to do it.

And the other thing is the anaerobic work can be really stressful on your musculoskeletal system, so a lot of people get injured. And as we talked about, injury is something that prevents the consistency and the mileage that you want, so that's the reason why we don't do a lot of it. But going back to those four systems, if you were to, just for the purposes of translating into efforts, if you were to translate those systems into percentages, kind of percentage of effort, what would they translate to?

Okay, so this is where the rubber meets the road, right? So you can talk about all that I talked about before. Most of you probably snoozed through it because it was pretty technical, but this is the real scoop, all right? So basically, your time spent running really easy running, right? Which is what we would call an easy run or a long run pace. I would call what we call rate of perceived effort, which is how we, almost all of us, basically decide how hard we're working. Most of us will be in that 50 to 60%. And so the aerobic conditioning zone encapsulates that, but it also encapsulates the next two zones as well, really. And those are basically the aerobic threshold and the anaerobic threshold, or what some people call the lactate threshold. And that's happening at 70% effort all the way down, I mean 80% effort all the way down to 60%. So technically, if you want to stay in that first aerobic conditioning zone, it's basically from 60% or almost as easy as you can go, because really walking out the door puts you at about 30%, getting about a mile to two miles in gets you to about 40 to 50%, and any distance over 30 minutes to 45 minutes is getting you right into that 60% effort zone in terms of the way I would look at that. If you go to the doctor, they ask you your pain threshold, and everybody's got different pain thresholds, but guys and girls, we can figure this out. This is pretty simple stuff. You would say that's 60% effort just to get to the point where you're running 30 to 45 minutes. But you can go all the way up to 80%, which is probably 80% of the training that we do at Rogue because we have so many marathoners that we're spending a huge, considerable amount of time in that zone. Now, it's really important to make this clear that while, especially on your long, long, hard workouts, they'll move into the next energy zone because of the duration. So if you go for longer than two hours at a certain effort or 90 minutes at a certain effort, I mean, at a certain lactate threshold or different energy zone, your effort will increase just because of the difficulty of going for that long. So it's important to realize that while you haven't changed energy zone, you may have changed your effort zone, and that effort will be affected that way. Once you get into the zone, get to the aerobic power zone, that is really between 80% and 90% of your maximum effort, of your maximum perceived effort. And that zone is really what we're doing when we're doing a lot of our interval work. Most of the interval work that people are doing, if they're doing 800 meter repeats, if they're doing 1, 000 meter repeats, if they're doing, you know, we do a workout, we do three times 5K, we move and we mix some of those zones, but basically that is in that aerobic power zone is up to 90%. Once you get from 90% to 100%, you're starting to move into that anaerobic capacity, that anaerobic conditioning zone where you're accumulating so much, you're beginning to accumulate more glycogen, more lactic acid from the sugars burning off than you can deal with. And so from that point, you're now moving into the anaerobic conditioning zone, and you're at, you know, 90% to 100%. The last zone where we almost never get, which is anaerobic power, I mean, that's 100 plus. Like, you are all out, as I said, you are in lactic distress. You are having a tough, tough time. So for our purposes, when we talk about effort-based training and feeling-based training, really what we're talking about is understanding these basic concepts and how they fit into the training zone that you're doing. Because as Chris said, it's really important not to be a slave to your training zone or to your specific paces, but you also have to work within a context of them and have a range within them in order to effectively train. As I say to many people, if you are not able to run at the paces on a given day that we have given for you, then you should probably stop the workout, go home and go back to sleep, or save it for another day, because you're not able to get into the place that you need to be. That's important from a training perspective, but also from an understanding your body's insights and what's going on. Now, I want to make something really, really crystal clear. I had a great example of this today. One of the athletes that we had, many athletes doing this really simple, basic workout today. It was four to five times their one mile, four to five times one mile at their half marathon goal pace, which basically is a true tempo, what we call a tempo workout. They had two minutes recovery, which was probably a little bit longer than I normally give people, but I wanted to make sure that they tried to stay in that zone. And what I told people was, don't go any faster than this zone. But what I did tell people when they started the workout was, it should feel very easy. And if in the first three reps, this is not very easy with that amount of recovery, then come talk to me. And the reason I said, that I didn't say anything more about it, I didn't carry on about it, but I had four or five athletes come to me, man, I don't understand. I'm really tired. And I was able to go back and say, how did you sleep? How have you been eating? What's going on with you since really? I said, this is a workout that should be in a zone, effort zone of 70 to 80%. And you're describing 90 to 95% efforts. And they were like, yes, I am. And I said, well, put on your coat, go back to Rogue. You need to get back and get easy. You're not getting, that energy system that we're trying to tap is not being appropriately tapped. We're not able to mine it for all the things that we need to mine it for. So stop and take a rest. And if those athletes at that moment will take the time to say, this is the good thing, this is a wonderful thing, and I try to be as positive as I can about it, but as our Western-based American ways of thinking, we think we failed, and I try to make it the happiest, most amazing thing, go back and take an extra nap. But I understand it. People do not naturally, they're not naturally predisposed to doing this feeling-based training, effort-based training. And guys, we're talking about this because our second most important training principle is not running at specific paces. We understand them to be critical and crucial and very important, but it is way less important than running on effort and running based on feel. And that should be the primary goal, not running in zones.

And if you're not, then you're wasting your time.

It's a waste of time. Go back home and go to bed. Yes, and that is so hard for people to understand.

Yeah, so you were talking about aerobic conditioning. You used some terms there that I think sometimes vary depending on the context. But we at Rogue use a couple of terms, steady being one of them, as a term that describes efforts within the context of aerobic conditioning. Tempo is another one. Translate those two words for me for people.

Sure, so basically what we're talking about is what would be generically called threshold, right? Which is another one of those terms. So you got threshold, you've got steady, you've got tempo. What the heck are we talking about, right? So let's start with the overarching category, which is threshold. So that's either lactate threshold, which is really simple. It's the aerobic fitness or the current aerobic development that you have and your body's ability to remove lactate when it starts to accumulate in your body. So it's kind of a really scientific threshold. It's right on a spot, right? And some people will call aerobic threshold, what's that? Don't worry about that. Leave it alone. Don't even think about it. Just call threshold, literally that scientifically based half marathon pace centered. And that is also equal to what we call tempo. So those two things are the same. When you talk about threshold, you should be running basically your half marathon pace or within 10 seconds on either end of it maximum. That's a tempo. That's a threshold run. A steady run is something completely different, even though you may be running exactly the same paces. All right, did you catch that? Something completely different, but running at the same paces. That means that you're just purely running a workout based on the way you feel. And you have, maybe you start out with a relative range of paces. With my athletes, I really like it when they don't pay attention to paces at all. But it should be in a place that we call comfortably hard. Hard enough to be doing work, comfortable enough to be comfortable. If it moves too far into the range of hard, you're starting to get into what we would call tempo work or lactate threshold work. If it goes too easy, guess what? You're doing a long, slow, easy run or long run. It's not in that same space. But the steady run is the most beautiful thing in the world because it takes the pressure off of people. It allows them to focus on what's going on internally and allows them to then say, I'm going to run on what it is today. As Chris, as you've heard me quoted to say many times, steady is as steady does. That's sort of a steal from Mr. Gump there. But it's basically making sure that on that given day, you're just doing what the body is telling you to do. But it is still in sort of that same arguable zone of what we would call a tempo run or a latte threshold run, but you're not focused on the paces. And that's a clear delineation here between what we're talking about. Pace-based work, very strict pace-based work, which is a lot of what 90% of people out there running are doing, and effort-based work, which is about 10% of the people that are running, and those people that are doing effort-based running, they are beating you at races, guaranteed. It is a guaranteed way to be better, is to do more of that kind of work so you can start to get that internal clock telling you the information you really need to know.

The steady run is powerful because it teaches you how to run by effort. It teaches you how to modulate that effort depending on how you're feeling. And in a lot of ways, it can teach you how to dial in to pace too, because oftentimes when I'll do it, I won't look at my watch during the run, but then afterwards I'll look back to see what paces I was hitting, and I'm able to calibrate how I was feeling with the pace outputs from my watch to kind of figure out, you know, how I can dial in when I need to be more specific with my paces. So with that kind of teeing up the next part of this discussion, let's talk about technology and how that can be a tool. And we've talked about before you shouldn't be a slave to your Garmin, but at the same time, it's a valuable tool that you can use or a heart rate monitor. It's another valuable tool you can use to help you calibrate yourself when it comes to efforts, but you have to be very careful about how you use it. So what do you think there?

So it's called dialing it in. I mean, you have to dial all this information in, all this physiological gobbledygook speak with real effort-based work. And nothing, there has been no greater gift to a runner than getting this technology. And technologically enhancing your training is, in my mindset, one of the singular most amazing changes for people. When I started running, when I was doing training, when I was getting fit and running at a high level, I did not have this. I was basing everything on effort, which made me a great effort-based runner. But I very frequently probably tipped over and into not listening effectively, and hence into overtraining. This technology, or I like to call it the geek-o-meter, because pretty much everybody geeks out on that information when they see it. They upload it to Strava, they look at it on their spreadsheets, they go crazy with it. It should be utilized post-run. And in my opinion, almost exclusively post-run. I think that people who utilize their technology resources in the run begin to become slaves. And being a slave to technology is, to me, one of the greatest gifts to runners has turned into one of the absolute worst things that could ever be, because a tool is taken. And instead of taking that tool and using it where it's supposed to be, you're taking the tool and turning it to another end. It's like taking a crowbar, which is used to remove things from the wall or to push things in and out of places and to be a tool. And now you're taking the crowbar and hitting somebody over the head with it. Yeah, it's easy to murder with a crowbar, but it's not the intended purpose of that tool. The intended purpose of that tool is to utilize it for what it's supposed to be. It is dialing in what's going on. So use your Geek-O-Meter out on the roads, out on the trails, but don't really look at it so much. And then take that information, all you technologically enhanced people, take that information and base your basic efforts, and then dial them in with what was actually happening. And very quickly, very quickly, you will become really an advanced level runner, if you're willing to do that. I would say the best suggestion I had, single best suggestion I could have for any runner anywhere, is to have a Geek-O-Meter, have it running for all your workouts, look at that information after you run. And then in a race, you can actually use your garment or that technology to help you in a race, because you will already have an inherent trust in what's going on. And Chris, this is the key thing. These gadgets are making us distrust our own internal rhythms and our own internal way of running. And this is the gift that running is in the first place. It's supposed to be the not technologically advanced. You don't have to have just the right skis and the bike seat sitting in just the right spot and your bars sitting in. It's all about just running free, and yet people are not running free. They're running as slaves to this device.

Yeah, I just sent an email to my group today as we're transitioning into a new training mode. We're kind of going into this reset, so to speak. We're recalibrating, probably coming off a big fitness peak, and you tend to dip a little bit when that happens. And so I encourage them during this next four to six weeks as we move to sort of reset the body and start to rebuild their fitness from the ground again to not go to take off their watches periodically, because there's something that happens, magic happens when suddenly you don't have something on your wrist. You do dial into a slightly different approach to running. And so I do think occasionally that's important too, but I agree with you. Post-run, take a look at it. I've used it in the past. Also over time to look at the same workouts I've done a couple of times and calibrate across those workouts because I can remember how I felt on both days. And I might also know the weather. Maybe the course was slightly different. And I can sort of calibrate between the two. Maybe I felt worse on one day, but then I look back and I see the weather was warmer. And the course we were on was hillier, so it sort of made sense that it's probably the same output I was giving out, but there were other variables that were at play that made me feel differently. And so those are the other two things I would say is, one, just go without it, and then two, reiterating your point about using it after the fact. So as we wrap this and then move to our next, I want to also give people some practical things to take with them if they don't train with us. If you train with us, you're going to get a lot of this, although some of you may not think about it that way because oftentimes we are talking about paces when we really mean efforts. How can someone practically apply these things? And one thing I would say on that is if you have a coach and they give you a workout with pace descriptions, ask them the question simply, how should I feel during this workout? And get a description of that so you can calibrate that with what they've told you from a pace perspective. But what other tips would you have, Steve?

Yes. Checking in is important. Also, one of the things that I love to do is I will give the athletes two basic start points when we talk about paces so that they will help them start to dial in better, too, efforts. And what I ask them to do is to take their marathon time that they just ran or they ran recently and go on to a calculator and find out the equivalency paces for your 5K, your 10K, your half marathon and your marathon. You can go to any site. I love McMillan. Shout out to my bud, Greg McMillan. He has the greatest one in the world. Use that one or any other one you can find. But get your equivalencies for, let's say you ran a 310 marathon, and that's your goal. That's what you did. That's what you accomplished. That's what you got done. And if you want to get all fancy about and put in the exact time to the second that you did do that, that's where you've been. And you need to have been there recently. This is not for just bringing new starting runners. This is for folks who have been in a marathon training mode. And then go and say, okay, plug in your goal time. So now I want to run three hours. Let's just use that as an example. So you've got a 310 pace. You've got a three-hour pace. Now you've got to go down and write all the equivalency paces for 5K to 10K to half marathon to marathon with those. They all fall into these physiological training systems that we talked about. And then on any given day, run between your two paces. If you're feeling good, run down to but no faster than the goal paces that you have written. If you're feeling terrible, run no slower than the paces that you've got written on your 310 time. Why? Because if you're going slower than that, you're probably not getting into the zone that you need to be and you probably need to take an easy run. So that's a real practical way to take and then to take these pace things that we talk about consistently and plug them into effort bases. And then the best thing about that, the thing you need to do is then write down what that effort was on that given day. And if you can do that and you can start to get really good with your efforts, and these efforts should range from 5 to 10. There is no harder effort than 10, and there is no lower effort after 30 minutes of running than 5. So use that number and just plug in where it was and over time, if you keep a training log and you go back and you look at your training log, you're going to see, this day I ran it this way, what were all the reasons? Now all the variables become really crystal clear as to why you didn't get it done that day. The other day we had a day where the weather was 75 degrees. This is February in Texas, folks. It's like 75 degrees at 5.30 in the morning with like 95% humidity and it's not raining. That is fricking miserable if you're in the winter and you're not expecting it, your body's not ready for it. And people were doing critical velocity work, which is exactly your 15k pace, and they were falling to pieces. They were having a hard time managing it and getting it done. Guess what? That day means that even the effort and the weather that happened on that day changed the efforts. And so the paces are not so important. Having a wider range and a bit of a range there gives you a great chance to have bad days and still feel like you're getting something done. And when you have good days, you've got to guarantee that you try to have a guarantee that you don't go any faster.

Okay, the other reason, as we segue to our third training principle, which is Every Day Has a Purpose, the other reason these efforts are important is because when a coach tells you to do a workout at a certain paces, they really mean certain efforts. And the reason they're telling you that is because they're fitting together the puzzle of your fitness by cobbling together, working on these different muscle systems within your aerobic system, in a way, to build you towards a peak result. So they're doing it because every day within a week, every day within a training cycle, every day within the context of your overall development has a purpose. And if you run outside of those efforts on those days, then you're defeating the purpose. You're destroying the building block of the pyramid that is to your peak fitness. And so let's discuss now this third principle, which is that every day has a purpose. So there's certain efforts we're trying to run, and we're starting to run those certain efforts on certain days in order to build you towards a peak in your training. Now at the very basic level, we will say that you have to run your easy days easy and your hard days hard. Those are two very generic terms, but it means you have to modulate. You have to run certain days easy, certain days hard. But talk about that general principle, and then we'll drill into the more specifics of what a week might look like and what a micro cycle might look like.

What's really interesting about that is that basically we are transitioning effort-based training right into Every Day Has A Purpose with this discussion. Because generically from the outset, at the highest meta level, at the biggest picture piece, we're talking about everything having its right place, everything having its reason for being done and reason for doing. And if you're able to listen to your body and pay attention to the sort of biorhythms and all the things that are going on within yourself, and you're doing them within a well-planned out, what I'll call, periodized cycle, then you're actually taking these two concepts, our second most important concept, which is effort-based or feeling-based training, and this every day has a purpose, and bringing them together in a really, really simple way of understanding. And so that idea basically is to take, this whole concept is basically what we all will call periodization. So periodization is having a reason for doing a workout, and that reason, checking a physiological box off, checking an effort-based box off, or checking whatever needs to get done. If you're self-coached, this is one of the hardest things to do, and it's certainly one of the things that makes people's starting line experience is very difficult when they're self-coached because they don't have this sort of built-in, inbred confidence that what they've done is appropriate or that they're ready for the effort they're about to put in. I've recently, over the last two or three years, begun to pick up in my own coaching a number of formerly self-coached athletes, and we've had differing levels of success with all of them. But the biggest part of why we're having levels of differing levels of success is those folks who are willing to take the effort-based training and plug it into my overarching basic periodized reason for why we're doing each workout, and they do that effectively. They usually have a, everybody has about a six-month to nine-month problem window, but within that, they really do. They really mesh in, and they get it perfect, and they appreciate that now we have an overall arching plan, but they're still the masters of their own domain. They're still the ones that are deciding whatever effort is important, so they get to have all those wonderful aspects of being a self-coached athlete, but they have somebody else making the decision so that when they stand on a starting line, they feel good about it. On the flip side, those folks who don't do that, they actually shift it around, and they take all the pressure off of themselves listening to their own bodies, and they seem to think that the numbers and the times and all those things are the absolute most important part. And then they question all the workouts that we've written because they don't seem to line up with the thing they're ignoring, which is their effort-based training. So I think that the reason I bring all that up is basically saying that these two things really are interconnected, and understanding why you're doing workouts and how that works is so important. If you're a coach, it just lets you have confidence in what you're doing. If you're coached by yourself, then this stuff that we're talking about next could be some of the most important things that we'll talk about because you guys have got to start to understand not so much all the energy systems. That's what all the books and the magazines and everybody's are talking about, right? What we're getting ready to talk about now is everything in its right place or why you're doing a workout and why every workout matters and knowing what you're doing and it matters is so important. If you can learn this part, and you can balance that with everybody's training, you're going to be in a really good spot.

So it's also another way that we put this is it's stress and rest. A lot of people get it in the context of strength training. So you stress the muscles, you tear them down so they can rebuild themselves stronger. We're essentially doing the same thing with our aerobic system and our anaerobic system as we do training is you're stressing the system to make it do work and then kind of tear it down a little bit in the context of that work and then build back stronger through rest and recovery. And if you're not balancing those two things right within the context of a week, much less a training cycle, then you're not ever building, you're only tearing down. So in the context of my groups, which is less advanced than yours, I generally tell people there's sort of four different types of runs within a week. And you might be doing four total, you might be doing six or seven total, but they'll all fit into one of these four categories. The slowest, the easiest is a recovery run, which comes after either a hard workout or a long run, where your most important thing is movement and blood flow to help the muscles clear out the waste from the previous day's work. And you're running your easiest miles those days. You're also getting aerobic benefit, but it comes in the easiest end of that range. Then there's, so that's recovery runs, easy runs, which are going to be sort of your other filler runs. Oftentimes, we advise people to do a medium long run where they're running not quite as long as their long run, maybe half that distance, but it's longer than most of their other easy days. And so you're sort of doing it at that easy pace. So there's easy days where you're just getting in the work without stressing your body. Then there's workout days where you're doing specific work. And one of the things at Rogue, we typically, for most of our athletes, only do one of those a week. A lot of programs have a two-workout cycle. Really, only our most advanced team Rogue athletes do that. So only one workout a week because we are prioritizing all that easy aerobic work, you know, four to six days a week and then one workout in the context of that.

Because miles matter.

And so there's a workout and then the fourth type is your long run where you're going, you know, maybe 20 to 30, 40% of your weekly mileage in one run, depending on your total mileage, to get that long aerobic effort in. So that's how I break it down. Any thoughts there on the composition of a week, Steve?

Well, I think the most important thing to do is, the reason we come up with ideas of composition of weeks is because we're all stuck into a 7-day cycle. So the 7-day cycle by itself is sort of a really challenging aspect of anybody trying to create programming, because you're going to create certain... Because people will want to be creatures of habit, and people will want to do the same thing on a Monday, and the same thing on a Tuesday, and we do our quality workouts on a given day, and then we do our long run on a given day, which then creates two days gone. If you get one day off, which a lot of people do, now you're at three days, you only have four more days to run to figure out where to get anything else that you have to get in. And so it's important to, at that point in time, it's, that's why I'm always much more, I'm much happier talking about what we call micro cycles, which is a longer period of time. But basically those four areas are exactly everything that you're doing with 50%, but basically, if we go back to our other conversation about what's going on in energy systems, that means of those four, 25, 25, 25, 25, 75% of the kind of work we're doing, it's all in that aerobic conditioning zone, and maybe much of what we're even doing on the quality, maybe in that same zone. But basically, it's the best way to think about it, because if you don't consider your recovery day a recovery day, then you won't take it as such. If you don't think of your Easy Run as helping you and as an advantage point, as something that's going to make you better, then it's not a good thing. Everybody knows that their quality day is going to be good for them, and everybody knows that their long run day is going to be good for them. Probably the most important thing you talked about in there is that sort of Easy Day that we call a medium-long run. My group doesn't do the medium-long run so much because we do two quality workouts in a week, or we do another long 10-ish to 12-ish mile run on a consistent basis. But probably one of the things that separates Rogue from many, many other programming that are out there is that real insistence on the medium-long one. We write it into every single schedule that we write in for all of our athletes because it's the extra benefit day. And if they're willing to take the time and energy to get it in, sitting in that energy zone and sitting in that space for that extended period of time can be hugely, can be a huge advantage.

Watching my athletes, the difference between the ones that hit their goals and the ones that don't are the ones that do their medium-long days. Because it's easy to do your long run when you have from here 200 to 400 people going with you. It's easy to show up on Wednesdays for my group and do your workout because you've got 50 people to do it with. It's hard to get in those medium-long days on Mondays for my group on your own. But those that do it and do it consistently, that makes a difference because you're getting, it's sort of those 10-mile, you know, for marathoners, 10-mile runs, 8-mile runs, maybe for half-minute runners. That's where the butter is made.

Where the magic happens.

That's where the magic happens.

That's so true.

And getting the steady diet of those in consistently, week to week to week, that's when you see people have breakthroughs. It's not the sexy day at all. It's not the day everybody shows up. It's the miles you're doing on your own on a Monday. At easy paces, nothing fast, nothing flashy, but that simple, aerobic work done consistently over time will make the difference between hitting a goal or not.

Yeah, I mean, we're going to talk about this in our mental training things that we'll be talking about later, but one of the things I talk about all the time is being resilient, and that's resilience. That is the recognition that you have a job to do, and if you want the goal that you want, you have to do the dirty work. You want a clean house, you got to clean a toilet. And sometimes the medium long run feels like that's that day. Yeah, we make it a lot easier in Team Rogue because that medium long run is pretty much just buried in the cycle, whether they know it or not. But for everybody else, my goodness, that makes... It is physiologically and from a training perspective immensely important. I don't want to diminish the physical value of it. But the mental value of it could even be greater, which is pretty amazing.

So that's sort of easy hard principle. As we said, about 75 to even 85% of your running should be at easy paces, easy miles to build that aerobic foundation. Then we go into thinking about training cycles. You talked about micro cycles already, but a series of micro cycles build into a macro cycle, which might be a five to six month training block where someone's gearing up for a specific race. How are those macro cycles constructed? Because during each of those months, we're doing a little bit of different work, especially from a quality standpoint, in order to build to the peak for race day.

So it's all based on a periodization schedule, and periodization is basically planning out those different energy systems and those different effort based systems that you need to plug into your training in a way on the front end that allows you to stay focused and intent on getting the job done and being sure that you're balanced in all the varying things that you do. So let's build from the... You just asked the question, building from the meta to the micro. I'm going to build it the opposite. I'm going to go from the micro to the meta, because sometimes I think it's easier to think that way. Number one, think of a seven day cycle as pretty arbitrary. So the only reason we even work in seven day cycles in a week cycle is because that's the way our society is built. That's the way our jobs are built. That's the way our recovery days are built. That's how everything is built. So I don't stray from that. If I could, I would. Many of the most elite coaches in the world do not even use seven days as their cycle. They are frequently in ten day, fourteen day, and the fourteen isn't because there's two seven days. It's much more about what's going on in their micro cycles. So that micro cycle is basically the time between your first hard day, the first day of a hard training cycle and the last day of an easy week. So again, we use weeks because it's much easier to do. So we do twenty one day micro cycles at Rogue. And many, many people do this. That means two weeks of what we would call hard work with a one week drop. So many people who look and say, what's a drop down week? Well, a drop down week is an ability to ensure that the macro does not overwhelm the micro. It's also to ensure that the micro doesn't become more important than the macro. And so what you're doing there is guaranteeing or inserting rest and recovery and recuperation time to get the super compensatory, the super compensation that happens when you work hard and then you get a rest. And you work hard and you get a rest. When we talk easy days easy, hard days hard, that's relevant. What's more relevant is hard weeks hard, easy weeks easy, because that's where really the things are getting done. And so in that cycle, there's a lot of easy runs. In a hard week, in a hard 21-day cycle, the majority of things that are being done are easy-paced running. But the key sessions in those micro cycles, those key workouts, are designed around every micro cycle fitting into a bigger picture. So I'm now going to go to the macro from the micro. The micro is most important is being sure that you've got your quality days, you've got your long runs, but you've got a down week every three weeks, every two weeks, depending on how you do it. Some people even do it every fourth week, depends on their system. Does it really matter? You need to be a pretty advanced runner if you're going to be willing to do 28 day cycles. If you're going to do that, you really need to be at another level. So for most folks, 21 days is optimal. Two weeks hard, one week easy. From the macro cycle, what we're doing from the bigger picture, it's basically standing back and saying, one of my favorite quotes is, what does the race require? And you're going to run a command performance event on one given day, and if it's a marathon, you're not going to get a second chance at it. It just is what it is. And so what we do is we then step back and look and say, within those hard weeks, what's the work that we need to get done to be sure that we're ready for that race? Sometimes that will include these varying pace workouts that we talked about. Sometimes it's marathon distance runs on your long run. Sometimes it's closing in that. Sometimes it's doing workouts in that zone. But basically, it's standing back and saying, what are the things I need to make sure? So a marathoner will recognize this. I've got certain athletes who tell me if they don't get six 20-plus mile runs in, they're not ready to run a marathon. I do not understand that in any way, shape or form. But for them, in that macro cycle, they know what the race is going to require of them. And that means having a great starting line experience that says, I'm prepared for this day. And so that means in that cycle, if it's eight months or six months or whatever, they better build in appropriately those six 20-mile long runs. What you do is really not as important as you believing in what you do, but you do need to look at it and then you need to periodize and make sure that in those cycles, the appropriate amount of work is being done, either physiologically or effort-based, or to get the long run in to achieve what you want to. This is the same. We write macro cycles for the absolute beginner runner all the way up to our world beaters and our Olympic trials and Olympic Games qualifiers. It's an important global picture, an important year-long picture of what it is. In my suggestion, almost all macro cycles should not, mostly shouldn't be too much shorter than six months. In some cases, they'll be four months for much more advanced runners. Or if you're going from a marathon base into a really short 5K, 10K base, like many of our athletes are going to be doing because they just did a huge marathon-based training, and we're going to cut them down for about eight weeks to get them faster. That's another macro cycle, but it's within a bigger picture. But all athletes at every level should be doing this six to eight month windows. Beyond that, it's really hard for the human being to stay focused on one given task.

And we break it down generally into four buckets over those months. We start with, and oftentimes these are combined, a base training and speed development block to start off where you're working on base mileage, building your mileage up, and maybe a little bit of efficiency, form efficiency, speed work with lots of recovery to help prime the systems for the work that's going to be happening from the speed standpoint later. So you start with that base and speed development, then go into strength, the strength program, or strength module where you're doing a lot of that aerobic power and kind of upper end aerobic conditioning work, as well as building kind of raw strength and speed and power from just a leg speed standpoint.

And lots and lots and lots of hills.

So you're doing hills and things like that. That's quintessential idiot. And then you go into a race specific speed block, the third segment, where you're refining your race specific pacing and then a taper at the end to make sure your body's rested and recovered for race day. So that's generally how we break it down, but it can also, as you say, things can kind of be mixed and mingled depending on the athlete and the purpose and goal for their event. So with that in mind, how should the runner then be thinking about those macro cycles and then stringing macro cycles together over the course of maybe a couple years to make sure they're continuing to build?

Yeah, so that's the sort of global cycle. I call it that because I don't know how you get more macro than maybe a meta cycle, right? But it's looking at your long-term goal and recognizing that getting there is going to take a while. And so those macro cycles are developed around race-specific finish results that allow you to then plug in the appropriate times and goal times and things that you want to do from a training perspective. But the more meta level is that sort of global cycle. The global cycle is all about trying to get down the road to the place that you want to be. So many people who are trying to get a Boston Qualifier, that sort of global view, that sort of meta level, is the most important thing, because if you look at getting from here to there in a short period of time, it becomes untenable. It's just not possible to get there. And I see so many folks chasing that Boston Qualifier. As soon as somebody tells me they want to qualify for Boston, if they're more than 10 minutes away from their goal time, I tell them 18 months, don't even talk to me if you're not willing to be that consistent, which means that they would go through a minimum of three macro cycles in that window of time. So that means they've got the first macro cycle to get used to the butt kicking that's going on. Number two, it's to them to figure out that the butt kicking is good for them. And by the third one, they're actually ready to take advantage of it, and they're fit enough to be in a position, as we call it, fit enough to train for the thing that they really want. And once somebody jumps 10 more minutes or 15 more minutes in a marathon or at a 10K, trying to jump another two to three minutes, a minute or two minutes in a 10K, I mean, you've got to then go back and recuperate, recover, and then get back at it. So the other thing about that is that global cycle has built in these down weeks. And you talked about the sort of four things, and you kind of think of them as a banana split, right? Your base period is your bananas. Your sort of strength phase and your race prep phase is sort of your ice cream and your whipped cream. And then your taper is the cherry on top. In my coaching system, I don't usually put any cherries on top of my... I usually keep it pretty generic that way. But generally...

Maybe some nuts.

Yeah, after that, that banana split, you've got to step back, you know? Satiation, you're done. You've got to take a little bit of a break and then be visioning out to what's next. And if you don't have that global vision, that big picture of where you want to be, it makes it difficult. I mean, I think about you, Chris, how long ago we talked about the goal you wanted to run at this past Boston and how long we worked to get to that. That's what we did with Alice and Max. That's one of our goals of anytime somebody's trying to get to the Olympic trials. We're in a four-year global cycle that's fitted in with many multiple macro cycles within that global meta cycle. But that whole plan is to get ready for that very, very last event. And in my opinion, and this is definitely me showing my colors and wearing my heart on my sleeve, in my opinion, no disrespect to people out there running because if you're just running for running sake, God bless you. I think it's fantastic and it's wonderful. If you're continuing to listen to this particular episode or any of our podcasts, you probably have a goal in mind. In my vision, that command performance or some big meta-level command performance is why I'm a coach. It's why I'm in this business to start with because that stuff is so amazing. And it's the stuff of human, it's what the Odyssey and the Iliad were written about. It's what being alive is all about, is setting some kind of scary, hairy, audacious goal out there that just spooks you out. But it's so far away that you don't have to focus on it day to day. You can break it into the micro, then into the macro, and then the meta, if you follow the plans, we'll get where they need to get.

The other thing to mention in the context of all of this is that as you're thinking about long-term development over two, three, four-year cycle, it's important to mix it up in terms of race distances, in terms of the pace work that you're doing. So as you're doing different macro cycles, personally, I advise my athletes, and I follow this personally as well, not to do more than one marathon a year, and to mix it up with some half-marathon work, with some 10K-focused work, so that you're working all of those energy systems at different times, and then therefore building everything higher, so that the next time you go run a marathon, you're more prepared. And people often lose sight of that. When they get into this mindset of chasing marathons every six months, it ends up stunting their long-term development, because they're not working all the systems. And it takes a little patience, maybe, to think about it longer term than that. But it's really critical to getting to your potential versus sort of pre-materials stunting your growth, because you're always focused on doing the same thing.

Yeah, I mean, if you think... We were just talking about the energy systems. We talked about four of them, the aerobic and the anaerobic. If you're not getting ready for a 5K, then you are almost never working those other two energy systems that we were talking about. So you're never working the anaerobic powers, which is like four times 400 all out. And somebody who runs a marathon might say, why in the world can this benefit me? I'm telling you, it's an energy system that the human body utilizes in order to have effective performance. If we don't ever work on that system, if we go a year, two years, five years, six years without working it, we're not going to be the most effective runner that we can be. And so you have to have those windows where you focus on shorter distances. It also allows you to get in the mindset of understanding a crucial piece. I was just talking to one of my athletes about this today. The corollaries between the 5K and the marathon, to me, they're almost the same race. Bear with me for a minute. One takes 20 minutes or under to do for many people, and the other one takes three to four hours for people to do. But what's going on in the context of that race is the same. You can't go out too fast. You got to play it just right, but you got to stay on the edge to get where you want to be. At the end, it's going to hurt like shit, and you need to be prepared for it. What better way to get ready for the future marathon pain than to do it in a 20-minute window, where you could do 3 to 4 to 5 of a minute at the end of a cycle, and be a really well-trained, ready-to-execute athlete? And I truly think we live in Austin, Texas. We live in a marathon-centric town. It has taken... For years, I've been arguing this point, that we need to do more and more 5K and 10K-based training in our cycles. It seems that there seems to be sort of an energy moving towards that, whether it's us banging our heads up against the wall and banging the drum enough that people are actually listening, or what it is, I don't know. But this cycle, I've got somewhere in the vicinity of 10 to 15 people that are interested in doing this, and they're doing more of that kind of work because they know it's going to make them better at the half marathon, at the marathon, and in the long run, it's just going to make them better runners.

I always tell people, you can train for a marathon without actually doing a marathon, because the faster you can run a 5K, the faster you can run a marathon. The faster you can run a 10K, the faster you can run a marathon. The faster you can run a half marathon, the faster you can run a marathon. And when you're training for those other distances, you're improving your ability to ultimately go do that bigger race, which often gets most of the glory and attention, but is just one piece of the overall puzzle.

And the marathon has no physiological benefit. It doesn't sit in any of those fancy physiological boxes that we talked about. It's sort of the arbitrary race distance decided because a guy named Phidipides ran from marathon to Athens, and then the Queen of England decided at the second or third of the Olympia that they wanted to finish to come right in front of her house and whatever the place that is. I don't even know the name of it, the palace, whatever.

Buckingham Palace, yeah.

Buckingham Palace. So there is our marathon distance. Are you kidding me? So it's not in any... Whereas, weirdly, the half marathon is in this exact physiological system we were talking about. Sorry, I just get off on these tangents sometimes.

Now let's bring it all together because we've got to wrap this. We talked about feeling-based training or effort-based training, and we've talked about every day has a purpose. Now, bringing it all together, you have to listen to your body as you go through these cycles, and naturally, Steve, you're going to write a program for your athletes that says, do this on that day, and you might do it two, three months, four months in advance. But when you get to those days, sometimes it's different, and you need to change and adapt. So let's talk about response-regulated work and adaptation in the context of training, because in the midst of all of this, no matter what your training plan calls for, you still have to listen to how you feel and adjust accordingly within a certain window. What does that mean and look like?

It means recovering, plain and simple. Simple. The most important part of nearly all of these different energy systems that we're talking about, it's about getting recovered. So you can do work, and you can do bouts of work, whether they're effort-based or pace-based, whether they're in a time and a context of what you're doing in a micro or a macro or a meta sort of cycle. But ultimately, if you're not recuperating and recovering, if you're not listening to that sensory information, or if you're not very good at the sensory stuff, that's okay. People pay for coaches, and you know what those coaches do? They build them in and making sure that they listen to their body, that they at least take the down weeks. And that's why many coaches scream and yell at their athletes to slow down, to listen to their body, to recuperate and recover, because guess what? Without the recovery, you are never going to get to the next level. It's not the actual workout that makes you better. What makes you better is your ability to take in that hard work, assimilate it, recuperate and recover from it, and then go do another bout. Hopefully, a little bit changed and a little bit different. Hopefully, not exactly the same workout over and over again, so you can get the physiological responses you're looking for, which is getting faster. But there's only one little piece, one hard effort, and that is important, but it is nowhere near the most important thing. The most important thing is to be sure that all of this is where effort-based running comes in, and we're planning out what's going on in your overall daily training or monthly training or weekly training cycle is. Putting it together is getting recuperated and recovered. That's the most important thing, and that's what it all comes down to. And if you're not in that space, then you're better off just running easy all the time.

We like to say around Rogue that no one workout is that important. No one workout matters more than the consistency you could put in over months and years. One of the hardest things I've found in my personal training journey is deciding when to say uncle. When you wake up on a given day and you don't feel it, sometimes there's magic in fighting through and pushing through that and still getting the work done because that has a mental training component. But sometimes you're supposed to say, hey coach, today I'm not feeling it. I need to do something else like you told some of the athletes today during that workout. You're not hitting it so back off and just run back. And one of the ways I've found that's helped me figure that out, and this is a tip I got from the great running philosopher George Sheehan, is he used to check his heart rate every day when he woke up, like right after he woke up. And there's an app on the iPhone heart rate app where you can basically use your iPhone's camera to measure your heart rate with your finger every morning. And so when I'm in a heavy training mode, I wake up, I check my heart rate. And over time, you're able to see kind of within a range what's normal. And for me, if I'm really trained and resting and everything's great, maybe 45 to 48 will be my heart rate. When I'm a little bit stressed, I'll see more like 50 to 53, knowing that that's okay. That's sort of like a hard week. I'm going to wake up and I'm going to see a 52, and I'll know that I can still go do the work that day. But if I start to see 55, 56 and above on a given day, I know that something's wrong. Maybe I'm getting sick. Maybe I haven't recovered as well as I need to, and that's when I need to raise the red flag and say, hey, look, it's time to back off today. So that's a tip I have for people in the context of this response-regulated kind of a discussion of when to know when not to just go do it and gut it out. Final thoughts on this thing, Steve, before we wrap.

Well, first of all, yes, yes, yes. What you're saying is something I tell most of the athletes that I work with when we get to that next level of talking beyond times and paces and workouts and efforts. It's how can I figure out what my best effort is, and it is your morning resting heart rate. And I ask people to do it three times a week because it's super simple. They're here three times a week. But I cannot recommend that enough. Write it down in your training log or make sure that it's somewhere you can see it on a consistent basis. And utilize it to be sure that you're getting recuperated and recovered and that you're able to do the hard work that you need to do. I wanted to end this discussion with a really short quote from one person I consider probably one of the great coaches in the world. His name is Renato Canova. Different people pronounce his last name a little differently. There's a beautiful quote. It comes off of the Let's Run forum. Number one, English is not his first language. Number two, if you read the entire quote, it would be amazing, but we're already running way over time on this episode. I'm just going to share with you the most important part of it. It basically says, don't forget that the most important problem is to make easy what is difficult. Think about that. That the biggest thing that you're trying to do in your training is to take what was hard or what is hard and make it easy. If you can keep that in mind, then effort-based training becomes a lot simpler. Maybe not easy, but a lot simpler. And it also allows you to take the ideas of periodization or knowing what you're doing on any given day and being sure that you're careful about that. You're able to then process that in a way that ensures that that difficulty, that hardness over time becomes easier. And anybody that's run a goal time and is in a marathon that has allowed them to improve, say from 255 down to 250, they will tell you that the single most incredible thing is that the paces that they ran before that they thought were hard are easy. And Kanova's quote goes exactly to that point. And just continue to remember and keep cognizant of the fact that the most important problem is to make easy what was once difficult.

There you go. We're already over time. People may have to listen to this one in two bouts, but that's okay. We are finished with episode 10. Today we talked about our second and third primary training principles. One, about feeling-based training and how effort is important. And then two, how every day has a purpose, and you should be working those different efforts on different days to achieve your goal. We will come back in several weeks and finish this series where we talk about the fourth and fifth principles from our first episode. But if you haven't already, listen to our first episode, number one, our seventh episode where we talk about miles matter. And then, of course, thank you for joining us today. We will wrap it. As always, check us out on Facebook at forward slash Rogue Running. We're also on Twitter and Instagram at Rogue Running. You can find us online at roguerunning.com. So for Steve and I, we'll check it out or check out today. Talk to you soon.