Hey everybody, it is episode 75 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is Chris piping to you from Austin, Texas. Steve is here with me in studio. How are you doing, Steve?

I'm doing amazing.

Well, welcome to the show, everybody. We're super excited to have a special guest today. We've got Greg McMillan on the show for an interview, doing a little coaches talk with Greg, and he'll be giving us a lowdown on everything from his core training principles to the McMillan Running, the famous McMillan Running calculator.

Greg's been a friend of mine for, goodness, 15 plus years. Been both a friend and a mentor and a lot of other things in between, and anybody that doesn't know McMillan Running, what rock have you been sleeping under? Especially if you listen to this podcast, because we only reference his calculator about 50 million times in nearly every episode, but not only is it a pretty amazing tool, but he's an amazing guy who has had a lot of experience working with all levels, from Olympians all the way to beginners, and I think we had a really, really good conversation, Chris. Mostly this conversation just continues to reiterate over and over and over again the gospel of what we would call the gospel of Rogue, but it's probably just sound training principles, right?

Exactly, so we will get-

And magic, and magic.

Well, which is interesting. Greg's a scientist by training his masters in exercise physiology, came to the coaching world from that perspective, but has definitely evolved his thinking. I don't think he used the word magic in our conversation, but has clearly knows that there's a place for that in training. So really interesting conversation with Greg, which we will get to in a second, as we always do. We've got some intro topics to cover. The first one is from a couple of weeks ago that we just didn't get to last week. We had the US Road Half Marathon Championships in Pittsburgh on May 6th. Olefin Tilliamuk got the win to continue what has been a pretty good dominance from her on the road in a lot of these road races. She certainly won the series a couple years ago.

She's won this race, this was her third win in a row, I think.

She's won the US half several times. So has had big success here, this time at a new venue with the race in Pittsburgh. Chris Derrick won on the men's side, which is a big win for him and good to see. But we also had Gwen Jorgensen in the field for her half marathon under the tutelage of Jerry Schumacher. And this was a big fitness test in her journey to the Marathon Olympic team in 2020. So we're gonna break it all down and we'll start on the women's side because we've got to talk about Alfine as well as Gwen, of course, and then Sarah Hall was in the mix here. So the podium was Alfine first, Sarah Hall coming back from a nessi joint injury only three seconds back. They were in 110.04 and 110.07, respectively. Rochelle Canujo finished in 110.49. I honestly don't know Rochelle as well. So you might be able to add context there. And then Gwen Jorgensen ended up fourth, nearly a minute back of Alfine in, this isn't her half marathon debut, but her first half marathon under Schumacher's training. She finished in 110.58 on a relatively challenging Pittsburgh course. How do you break this one down? Alfine took it out hard, put the pressure on everybody from the beginning, which she likes to do. What do you make of this race, Steve?

You know, I think basically, the coolest thing about this race, or the biggest takeaway was, watch out for Sarah Hall, man. I don't know what else to say. I mean, Alfine is a stud, and she seems to be pretty much a specialist 25K to half marathon. That basically, somewhere between 12 miles and 15 miles, she just seems to be nigh on and unstoppable, but Sarah Hall was broken a couple of months ago, Chris, broken, we didn't know when we would see her again, and we kind of just quit talking about her, and she roars back with a performance here that's just out of this world. I think Sarah Hall could have one of the best mental games of all the American distance runners we have, male or female. I mean, she just always seems to be able to perform at an incredibly high level for where she currently is, and it's like maybe that faith thing, Chris, maybe it's that worldview that just allows her to pour out something. I mean, she closed on Alfine. That race was much longer. It would have been over. I mean, I think Sarah would have definitely caught her. I was just impressed mostly by Sarah Hall, but I will also say this, Chris. I was not unimpressed by Jorgensen. I thought when Jerry told her there was a reason why he didn't want to run in a half marathon, right, and why he wanted to run in a road 10K, he was like, she's not there yet. She's got a ways to go, and that's okay. The kind of attitude and approach that she has is gonna put her in good stead once that fitness starts to play out, but you can't fake it at this level, and the way that American distance runners, especially on the women's side, are running right now, you're gonna get your ass handed to you if you're not president correct, ready to go, and obviously Gwen was not, and that's okay. She'll be where she needs to be. You mentioned Rochelle Cahulo. I do know exactly who she is. She went to Northern Arizona University and was a less than, she was an All-American, I believe, but she always sort of was an under performer there, and she ran with the NAZ Elite for a long time. She was recently either, she was either dropped from NAZ Elite or she left. I'm not sure what the story is there, but she's running on, she's running a lot better now. She's getting, she ran 15.25, Chris, so it's not like you probably should have heard of her at some point in time. She's definitely got that ability. I remember when I was trying to get Mia Bane, we were trying to make this jump from, an athlete I coached at the University of Texas, then she ran in our post-collegiate group. I was trying to get her to, they made a big jump in the qualifying standards for the 5K that year, Chris. It went from like 15.50 to 15.25. And I remember Mia just going, throwing a fit and saying, I can't believe this is happening. I said, yeah, but guess what? Those who accept it will run, the same number of women will run 15.25 as ran 15.50 last year, mark my words. And they did. And Rochelle was one of those people who did. So she's somebody else we need to keep an eye on. Again, I'm not sure what she's gonna be able to do at an marathon distance, but she is intriguing from that 10K and up space. So American distance running as deep, American women's distance running especially is deep, deep, deep.

Three things for me. One, Alafey and Tulia Muk now trains within AZ Elite and the Ben Rosario crew there, which is a huge get for them.

Formally, when Greg McMillan was coaching that group before he retired from post collegiate coaching.

Yeah, when you go way back, Greg was Ben's coach. And so that group just keeps getting talent. They've already got talent there, but to have Tulia Muk in the fold there is a huge get for them. And every time I hear Ben Rosario answer questions from a coaching standpoint, I'm just more and more impressed. He's somebody who seems to have it the right way. And clearly he's been trained and mentored by people like Greg and others. But he also clearly has his own perspective, his own secret sauce, his own formula. And as a coach, I think it's important to have your own identity. You can't just copy what you've seen from others do. You've gotta have, you bring your own identity, your own spin, your own twist. And he has that. And I'm excited to see what happens with that group, especially as they're able to continue to attract more talent. So hats off to Tully Muck, Ben and her coach.

Let's hope Hoka continues to support that club in the way that it needs to and to try to get that first tier and second tier athlete. You're probably not gonna pull in the talent that goes to NLP right off the bat or to the Bowerman group, but maybe they will be able to. And let's just hope NAZ Elite and Hoka are able to get the kind of athletes that need to be there so that they can keep raising the bar.

And Tully Muck, you mentioned her success at the half and 25K distance. She has not had success at the marathon distance although she's tried. And I hope, but she is someone who has the talent to compete for a spot on the team if she can put those pieces together. So I think it's interesting to see if Ben can help her do that. Because if he can help her figure out the marathon distance, I don't want to overstate her chance of making the team, but she would be one of those that would be in the second tier who could on the right day surprise somebody and slip on to a podium at the trials.

I'm in a complete agreement. She races like a jack wagon. I mean, it's just off the front go hard all the time no matter what, which as you and I know is a recipe for disaster in a marathon. I mean, sometimes you do have to make those big moves, but you typically want to see them happening after within 10 miles from the finish line, not 26 miles from the finish line. So, but I also know that she's a warrior and that kind of attitude usually pays off well once they get a bit in bridle on and they're willing to be led by their coach and go from the wild Mustang to the thoroughbred that I think Alfine is. But you know, Chris, we haven't seen a couple of key names. Like we didn't see them at the half or the 25K championships we're gonna talk about in a second. You know, where is Natasha Rogers? Where is, why haven't we seen Emily Sisson? Where is she in this mix? What is she getting ready for? Like who are these younger Americans that we thought you and I were really high on had been high on this last year. They're not, is the USA running circuit just not a big enough deal that they're not getting their noses in there? Or what other plans do they have this year or the next couple of years that will be different? Because I mean, for both those two, they gotta be thinking about a marathon. They don't have much time.

Well, Roger's rumor has it she's been injured. That's what the rumors I've heard for those connected to the Magnus family.

Okay, all right, I know where you're getting your info.

We've got some injury issues I think with Roger's. And since then we know how Ray Tracy plays it. He likes to wait and wait and wait.

My words, New York City debut this year, I think you're gonna see Emily Sisson debut at New York City this year. I don't know.

I think there's no chance that happens, but I hope I'm wrong.

Well, we'll see. I think that they like to do it at New York and she's a tough racer, so I'm throwing that one out there.

Fair enough, we'll see. So my second point, Sarah Hall. Consistently underrated, underestimated. She's had success at the US level, has never really had international success. Won the US Marathon champs at CIM before she had the SI issue. She was supposed to be at Boston, but had the SI joint issue. It would have been awesome to see her at Boston with that mental toughness that you referenced to see if she could have hung in there for a top finish in Boston. Nevertheless, though, to be able to do, run this time to almost come back and get the win off of apparently what has been mostly swimming and aqua jogging and cross training type of training is really impressive. Sarah is someone who was really hyped up coming out of college. She had big success at Stanford. She was, at one point, more hyped than Ryan. Her husband, who ultimately overshadowed her in the elite ranks. And now she's sort of been this journey woman who's competed at the steeplechase level, all the way to the marathon, everything in between. She's not afraid to race a one mile or a marathon and just go at it. And normally, she's near the top, top five, top 10, every single time, if not podium. And so I don't know where she fits in this spectrum of US distance runners that are having such success, but you can't leave her name off a list of runners that are just, that are inspiring.

You know, I thought this whole thing with three marathons in less than six months, I was just completely against. And obviously, it didn't play out the way that she'd hoped it would play out. But I'm a fan. I'm just a fan of the way that she races and her gutsiness and her, you know, her lack of letting some little thing be a reason why she can't be great. And I will tell people, I think people should be not sleeping on her when we're talking about making an Olympic team in the marathon because if the game goes, if the race goes out and there's a lot of different ways where it could play into Sarah Hall's hands to make a team. I don't think she's gonna win it, but I do think that she has a chance to make it. And you know, Chris, we just keep saying that over and over again. I mean, we're gonna have a short list that it's gonna be pretty long.

A long short list for potential candidates on that US Women's Marathon team in 2020. Gwen Jorgensen, no concerns for me on this performance at all as you alluded to. You know, if you look at Desi, she ran 113 at the New York City half before winning Boston. I would imagine that Gwen went into this race probably without tapering at all, probably on full mileage, probably without doing all the work that Schumacher would have ideally had her do before racing the half under his purview. But my guess is she was so antsy and just needed a result that, you know, he's like, let's do it.

Put your hand on the fire, girl.

And for somebody like Gwen, this is only going to serve to be a motivating thing. You know, I don't know if you saw afterwards, she apparently has her own PR person or team.

Yeah, she's got an entire, like we need that marketing program.

They put out a video literally that same day, basically with a humble pie, with a pie emoji talking about, you know, how she ate some humble pie today and it was time to get back to work. So she had already processed it and said, look, she probably had higher expectations on the day, but she understands where this fits in her journey. That's one tiny little stepping stone and that's it. And with the mentality that she has as a gold medalist, this is only going to motivate her. So I'm still bullish in terms of her ability to build from this into something much bigger.

I am too crisp, but there is one thing that worries me a little bit about this race result for Gwen Jorgensen. Her career has been built on flat courses or track. And you know, that course, Pittsburgh's course is hilly. It's got some hills in it. It's not a flat, flat course. And I wonder if that played a little bit into it. So I do worry a little bit for Gwen as we talk about going into Atlanta, where we know we're going to see some hills. That's something she's going to need to, that's going to be a weak spot. She's going to need to shore up because almost all the Olympic distance races that she ran at the international level were always on very, very flat courses. That's one of the arguments people always make about those incredibly fast 10K times coming off of the bike with that Olympic distance racing is how can they run 29 minutes when they're running on dead flat courses. That doesn't change the fact that the men are running 29 minutes or the women are running 32 minutes or 30, it's still super fast, but I do think that might have added a little bit of difficulty. Gwen is no power runner. She's definitely, though she's tall, she is very lean and hills can be a problem for athletes with that somatotype.

Well, we know that she'll be getting plenty of hills at altitude with the BTC team as they probably went straight from there back to altitude, my guess.

Yeah, I think they're in, from what I've been seeing on social media, I think they may have gone to Mammoth Lakes. They change where they go. I don't even know if it's even individual athletes go to different places. I know they've been to Woodland Park, Colorado. Obviously they've had that camp that they usually have in Utah. So it's really interesting how they play different locations. I'm very curious about that, but we'll save that for another conversation.

For our Schumacher interview.

Yeah, let's put it out there. Anybody that's got a connection, we're down. We're down.

So on the men's side, interesting here that BTC finally, on the men's side, got a win over Scott Simmons and his US Army crew. Leonard Correa had trouble at the US or at the World Half Marathon Championships, had a little bit of trouble here as well, at least as far as his standards go. Chris Derrick got the win, 102.37, Parker Stenson, local Austin area, local Austin area, Talany went to the University of Oregon, finished only one second back, almost got the win from Chris, Andrew Colley, third, only three seconds back. So really tight up front for the men in relatively fast times of those one or two sort of mid times, career was a full minute back almost of that in fifth, which is interesting. And obviously he struggled at the world half, so perhaps he's coming back from something there. Finally, the magic has worn off for US Army, I don't know. But this has got to be a big confidence builder for Chris Derrick, who has struggled to get results recently, at least where he wants him to be at the top of a list. And so what do you think this does for him?

Well, I hope it starts a positive feedback loop that gets him going where he needs to be. Because he's a guy who, if he can figure this marathon thing out, you and I both know, he's got the chops. I just wonder a little bit about that. Why the women run so well in Jerry's program, the marathon distance, but the men have yet to get a result. You know, sometimes, Chris, as we know in our experience, that once a positive feedback loop gets built up in a group, a lot of amazing things can happen. It's obviously happening on the women's side with that crew. On the men's side for the marathon, they need a little bit of this. So getting a win here was critical and crucial. I'm excited. Hopefully he'll continue to improve and see great results. I mean, really the best guy running out of that group right now. And I mean, we do have Evan getting ready to get on the track, but the best guy running in that group right now is Mohamed, who's just been killing it at every level. And most people don't know him because he's a Canadian by birth and he competes for Canada, but he trains in that group and he's an absolute badass. He went to Wisconsin and what a... It's going to be interesting to see him play out. But hopefully those guys can get a real thing going for them, just like the women have in the marathon.

I hope so. We need somebody who can challenge Rupp and really that second and third spot on the US men's marathon team is wide open. So hopefully he can pull it together and compete there because he does have the talent to compete on the world stage. We know that for sure. Parker Stenson, sort of a journeyman of sorts now, went to University of Oregon, grew up here in Cedar Park. It was long time, was doing 10K distance on the track as a high schooler, which is fairly rare back in the day. So I was known for his endurance from an early age. Almost nipped Derek at the line here. Pretty cool to see that.

Parker's a baller. I mean, I'm a huge fan of Parker Stenson. That guy is, he's gonna come president correct every single time and he throws down. He looks like he's working way harder than he really is. And I think he's a little bit deceptive that way. It seems like he's in Boulder. He's got his game working really well. He's figuring the altitude thing out. He and his coach have a really, seems like they have a really good plan and his coach is only really not working, he's not working with that many people. And it seems like Parker has got most of his attention. And it seems to be playing out. Positive feedback loop, we were talking about now a couple times in this episode, Chris. Parker's one of those guys, if he gets on a positive feedback loop and it keeps going and lifting and lifting, watch out, that guy, the marathon is eventually gonna be his distance. And he's got, I don't know that he's fully committed there all the way in his heart. He probably has in his head, but I'm not sure if he has in his heart. I look forward to seeing him continue to throw down and create exciting races and make sure that everybody, he's the old school pre-Fontaine guy. He's a rock star runner in my opinion. He's gonna make sure everybody bleeds and everybody hurts before they get to that finish line. And he's gonna do everything in his power to make sure that they feel that way. Not only is he a local, and not only is he a cool kick ass dude, but he's a baller. I just love to watch ballers race.

And I'll remind the listeners that he was the one at the US half, sorry, the US full marathon champs at CIM who went off the front in 208 pace, ultimately fell apart, and didn't get what he wanted that day. But he's the type of guy who, if he shows up in Atlanta healthy and ready, you know there will be fireworks somewhere around Parker Stinson. Whether or not he makes a team is a huge question mark, but he will create drama and chaos in that race for sure.

And everyone will have to deal with it. And that's a huge trump card right there. That is, you know, this is Parker Stinson and Scotty McPherson in a lot of ways are very, very similar because they have that kind of attitude. I worked with Scotty for many years. We weren't able to get over the hump. I love to see Parker throwing down and getting after it and not being afraid to make everyone else pay.

Two more things here. Andrew Colley got third, Zap Fitness, another Zap Fitness guy. We talked to Joe Stillen a few episodes back, Episode 71. So he's a teammate of Joe's. He got dropped a little bit and then came back on these guys to only finish three seconds down. Another impressive result for the Zap Fitness crew with Peter Ray leading that group. So that's cool to see. And then career, it's interesting if you look at Ray the way the race played out. He was with the leaders until just after mile 11 and then couldn't hang with Derek as he made the moves there. And from my, I obviously didn't see the full stream, but from the way the results look, it looked like career quit in the last mile because he basically lost a minute over the course of the final mile and a half or so, which if he was still doing some work, he probably shouldn't have lost that much time and barring injury or something like that. So it's interesting to see him now having quit at the World Half Champs. Now quit a little bit even though he finished, he quit on the race in this one. So is there a change developing in the armor of Leonard Carrere?

No, I don't think so. I think the dude needs to stop fucking racing. I mean, stop it now. Take a break. You don't, you and, I mean, it's just too much, too much. You know, I don't know how those guys could keep throwing down with the kinds of race results that were getting week after week after week. He and Kip Tichier and who else was in that group? There was three of those guys. They were just throwing haymakers left and right all through the spring, through the summer, through the fall. And Chris, we talked about it. When was it? Yeah, there's chink in the armor, but it's just a temporary chink. No one can go that long. You chip away at your base enough and you are going to get humbled. You are going to get crushed. And he definitely dropped a minute because it's like, well, hell, why even be in that game? I mean, why even? I'm not gonna get what I want, so. But he's in danger of losing those big points. I mean, he's got, there's some money in this USA running circuit and he is in a little bit of danger of not getting a win here if he's not careful. But I think, Chris, mostly what we're seeing is just.

He's just tired.

He's tired and those guys need to break. And they're getting ready to go into track season. I don't know. I don't know what's going on there. I don't know how you can keep feeding that beast, man. That's like, there is no more. There is no more wood in the woodshed. We cannot feed this fire anymore. That's what I think is happening here.

Time for a break, career. Although, is he gonna get it? I mean, he's gotta go, gotta start the track season now.

I don't know. I mean, there's another whole side of this too, Chris. Anytime somebody drops a whole minute or doesn't show up at a starting line, you know, you and I, we get our heads ous scans a little bit. We get a, we start to do a little bit of the old doper dance was going on here, which I don't want to throw cast aspersions at that point here, but it is one of those things that's too DNA. If I hadn't seen repeatedly over and over and over again so many amazing performances, I would be in that mindset a little bit, but Leonard Carrere is also a baller, as we talked about. That's why we love him so much. He's like Cholima. They cut from the same cloth, like Parker Stinson is. They just like to race really, really hard. I just think you got a tired dude who needs to take a bit of a break.

Fair enough. All right, so quickly, a week later, we had the US 25K Championships in Gate River in Florida. Althea Tolima got the win again a week later, going from the half to the 25K, which is 15.5 miles for those that don't know their metric system. So she got the win on the women's side with Sarah Crouch behind and Emma Bates as well in the mix. On the men's side, Sam Chalanga, career's teammate, got it done there, and he was followed by Scott Faubel from NAZ Elite and Samuel Koski, another US Army runner, who also raced the half the week prior and got fourth. So you had a couple of folks coming back with decent results, Tulimukh being the big win, getting the big win going back to back weeks. Chalanga getting a win, which probably isn't a surprise for him, but kind of helps him maybe take some of the sting off of his London performance. Anything from the 25K that we need to talk about, Steve?

I don't think so. This is sort of, other than, I mean, I really do think on the women's side, I mean, Tulimukh is just the class of the field and didn't have, she just ran away from everybody right after a 13 miler the day, a week before. I think that the men's race was a little more interesting with Scott Fable. I'm interested to see how that plays out with him over the long term in terms of getting his marathon game up because he's another guy who's sort of under the radar that people don't pay that much attention to who may be able to get something done. It'll be interesting to see. Of course, we had an R Austin shout out to Allie Mendez Cleaver who placed in the top eight here. I think she was eighth place. And a girl named Kelsey Bruce who's from the Dallas area. I know her coach pretty well and she's continuing to improve and getting to have some real good results. She went to Dallas Baptist. She's getting some good results on the US circuit. Good to see that another Texan in the mix getting some great results done.

Yeah, I just have this feeling going back to the NAZ Elite. I have this feeling that assuming Hoka keeps supporting that group, you're going to see an NAZ Elite athlete on an Olympic marathon team.

I think you might see two, Chris. I think you might see one on the men's side and one on the women's side. And who they are, it's hard to play out here. They only have three women. I mean, for all intents and purposes, depending on how those races play out, the way that those women, the three women they have, Tilliam Muck, Stephanie Bruce, and what's her name? Kellan Taylor, those are big race performers on tough days. And I also think their men's team, I think their men's team is nowhere near as strong as the women's, and they have twice as many guys on their men's team as they do the women's team. But you're right, I think that there's a chance that we can see an NAZ elite athlete on an Olympic team, and that would be, for HOKA, money incredibly well spent.

All right, a couple quick things because we've got to get to our interview with Greg. Just announcements that we'll get to more in detail later. Because I just don't have the time to talk about it now, Steve. Galen Rupp and Jordan Hasay both announced they're going to be racing in Chicago in the fall.

Pusha, pusha, I have nothing to say anyway.

So we'll be coming back to predictions on Galen and Jordan in Chicago.

Do we need to start talking NOP certified instead of just Rupp certified? I did come up with a new nickname for him, by the way. Galen Rupp, I kind of like that one. Galen Rupp.

Galen Pupp will be racing in Chicago, defending his Chicago title. Jordan got third there last year, so she'll be going back and is coming back apparently relatively soon to start running in from her stress reaction. Also a heads up as you're listening to this, coming up here on May 26th, we've got the pre-Fontaine Classic, the big US Diamond League meet for the late spring. And it's always a good race to watch. It'll be on NBC Sports most likely. Sometimes it's on NBC, so check your listings for that and try to watch some of that. I know the Balmerman Mile is stacked as an example, but that's always a big meet. It attracts a big international field and there'll be a bunch of Americans in there fighting for wins as well. So check out the pre-Fontaine Classic.

Go Mario Hall.

Coming up this week, Mario Hall from UT as well as the Balmerman Track Club will be racing. But we'll be talking about full pre-Fontaine results, but definitely go out there, check your NBC listings and try to watch it so you can then be more informed when we do our recap. All right, let's jump into our interview, Steve, with Greg. We've already done probably enough of an introduction on Greg who really doesn't need much introduction, but if you haven't already been exposed to mcmillanrunning.com, check that all out there.

And it'll be in the show notes.

And we'll, of course, share it in the show notes. He's also the author of You Only Faster. We get to all of that and more with Greg, so we'll bring him on now. All right, we're welcoming Greg McMillan to the show. How's it going, Greg?

Good, how about you?

We're doing well here in Austin, although it's gonna be pretty damn hot here, so.

I think we're gonna get our first 100 degree day today.

Yeah, so you're in a much better place, I'm sure. But we're happy to be talking to you. Before we jump into a little background on you, Greg, I know you were in Boston. We had a full show dedicated to recapping Boston. We have a lot of people who ran the race in our groups or who listened to this podcast and ran. And I know a couple years ago, you did a deep dive after the fact on the heat in Boston and what that might have done to affect times. But I wanted to start there and just get your impressions of the day and if you've had any science in your head on how the conditions may have affected people on that crazy morning.

Well, I will say it was one year I was glad I wasn't running. Definitely was pretty ominous out there and just kind of uncomfortable, right? Like that may be the conditions that a runner least likes to run in. We'd prefer snow or a little bit warmer or something, but wow, just cold wind and rain was really tough. And I thought it was gonna be Armageddon. I really thought that everyone was going to have really struggle and potentially lots of health issues and things like that. And to be honest, it ended up being much better than my fears. And we even had a lot of people that ran personal best, ran really well. We had some people that were off by sort of just the normal percent that they might be off in a marathon. And then we had a few that kind of struggled on the day, but it definitely was not as challenging as I thought. Maybe for a few reasons. First, cold is certainly better than hot. You guys know that. And so that contributed to the race being a little better. Second, the wind, which I thought was gonna really wreak havoc, of course for the bulk of the field, you're sort of running around people the whole way. So it was only a few times during the race that it seemed like people really struggled into the wind. And then the wet seemed to depend on how people dressed and their tolerance of it, whether they ran well or not. So it ended up not being as bad a day as I thought, though certainly the people at the front of the race had a much different experience of having to lead and bear the brunt of the wind. And they had the advantage that they were inside leading into the race, whereas most of our runners were sitting outside in the village and getting cold and wet before starting the race. So definitely a very challenging day.

So what you're saying is no excuses.

Yeah, I think that it's hard to say, hey, this is a 5% day or a 10% day. It definitely, we had some people run great PRs and I just was like, how did you do that? But it just didn't seem to be quite as bad as I feared going into it.

And how many folks did you have running there? How many folks were your crew responsible for?

Yeah, we had about a little over 1200 in the race. So we had a good selection of people from kind of the front, middle and back. And across the board, most people ran pretty well. Some people a little bit off that struggled with the weather. And then we only had a handful that really had a tough day.

What do you tell those runners that didn't have the good day? What's the pep talk afterwards?

Well, hey, you ran the 2018 Boston. It's gonna go down in history as you were there. And it's Boston, so I think a lot of people accept when it's not even a good day. They're like, well, at least I ran the Boston Marathon. And one guy was joking, well, at least I wasn't at work. So this is better than going to work. So I was like, there you go, that's good.

Look on the bright side. You got it done.

Yep.

Awesome, let's back up a little bit, Greg, then get a little bit of background on you. I know a lot of people who listen know your name. We've referenced your programming on our show several times. You're most famous for the McMillan Calculator, which we'll get to in a second. And of course, you've got the book You Only Faster that I know a number of people have checked out. But tell us a little bit more about your background, how you got into running initially and how that evolved to becoming a coach.

Well, I grew up in rural Tennessee, and so we were super active as kids. And I think that kind of laid the foundation of being good at running, just because we were always walking and running and biking a lot. And we had what was called the Countywide Field Day, where I grew up. And in PE, you had to participate in all the different events. And then the top two in your school got to represent your school at the county meet, which was a big deal because it was in the football state. Seemed like it was like giant stadium to a little kid. And I ended up winning the mile run in my PE class at my school and then winning it at the county championships. And I did that for two or three years when I was in elementary school. And so the high school coach is smart. He just goes and watches that meet. And he says, well, there's my high jumper, there's my distance guy, there's my shot put thrower. And so by the time I got to middle school, he's sort of saying, hey, why don't you come out and run? And so I did. And ultimately like a lot of people who run in high school and in college, you just fall in love with the sport and it really became my passion and ended up being state champion and was very interested in becoming better. And that led to an interest in studying exercise science, which is what I did in undergraduate and graduate school. And anytime that you are a decent runner and you're studying exercise science, people start asking you questions. And I was obviously excited to talk about it and explain what I was learning in class. And soon they're asking you for a workout and then soon you're writing a training plan and soon they call you coach. So it wasn't really by design. It just sort of happened that people started asking me and I was happy to help. I love helping people. And that's kind of how I got into coaching, mainly through my own selfish interest in being a better runner and sharing that desire and what I was going through to try to be better and kind of blended those three things of trying to still try to compete and run the best I can now and studying exercise science and then coaching. And here it is today, 30 years later.

So you went to the University of Tennessee back at a time when it was in there, when we would call it their heyday.

Yeah.

What was that experience like running with one of the greatest distance runners in the US in history and Todd Williams, and then an entire team of pretty much bad asses. I mean, that was a full of really tough guys and you guys were always in the hunt for a podium position at the NCAA Championships and Cross. And then you had one of the most mercurial and interesting coaches on the face of the planet to do.

Well, it was interesting because I went to University of Tennessee Chattanooga first and that was a really good fit for me because I was sort of a medium fish in a smaller pond there. And then I transferred to University of Tennessee at Knoxville, the main campus in my junior year. And then I was definitely a very small fish in a big pond. And I did run at the same time that Todd ran each day, but definitely didn't run with him much. But what was interesting at Tennessee at that time, and as you said, that was the time they won the national championships in I think, 91, 92. That's right when I graduated. And though I was never really, you know, at that level to compete at a university like that, it was really cool to see, certainly Todd, who was a standout. And we would test him in the lab. And that was what was cool was that because they had such good runners, we would test them in the physiology lab. And he was just such a unique specimen. Physically, he had all the gifts, and then mentally had this complete drive. And then coach Brown, Doug Brown, who was the coach there, he was sort of old school and fit really well with the training of Todd, who's kind of one of those I'll run through a brick wall. But then he also had another guy named Glenn Morgan, who was probably the opposite of Todd. And he was kind of the number two man, but he was a low mileage guy, very injury prone, and they had to tweak his training so much. And that's where I first kind of witnessed this idea of, wow, these two guys are both really good, but they train very different in their strategy. So, Todd was big volume, do every workout, the maximum of everything, and Glenn was much slower on easy days and much less volume, but yet they both were so successful. So it was definitely an interesting time. And I have to say, I never, I was just there a little bit. I was never really at that level once I went to Knoxville.

I first met Coach Brown at the Molson party at Penn Relays. I can just leave it there. He was telling a Dolomite story. I'll just leave the entire, the rest of that alone. Coach Warhurst was there as well. It was the first time I realized, wow, these guys are crazy. I, this world is a little bit different than I thought, because my coach was super old school. He was Doug's coach. He was your coach's coach, so. But anyway, it's great to hear your background and hear how that played in. And you know, your experience in the lab, how has that sort of informed sort of the way that you started your coaching? Did you feel like you were much more of a science-based coach and then moved into a little bit more of the going to the, because you really are an art, you're an artist. You're not just a science coach. You know, you have the ability to look at it from a whole bunch of different perspectives. Tell us a little bit about how you transition from that, or if you even see it transitioning, or if you see them as maybe two pieces of the same puzzle. I'm curious to see what your take is on that.

Well, I think I definitely started out feeling like science was the answer. It was going to be directive of how people should train. And you know, quickly you learn that there are these general principles that human beings have in training, but you also begin to see individual variability. And so that starts to play into, okay, it's not a one size fits all. And then I was really lucky when I went to graduate school, my advisor was a guy named Russ Pate, and he top 10 at the Boston Marathon multiple times, qualified for Olympic Marathon trials, I think three times, got his PhD at University of Oregon in 1975. So he was there with Pree and, you know, Bowerman and the whole load of them. And whenever I got there, he and I were, you know, we always talk about running and training and stuff. And he said, well, here's the thing, exercise science is just going to tell you why the things work that coaches and athletes have already figured out. It will help you tease out the individual differences, but it will not provide, you know, some breakthrough answer that we don't already have. It's just, is the right training being applied to the right athlete? And so that really, I guess, sums up what I feel is, as you mentioned, sort of the art and the science. I do think that understanding the science and applying principles can help with the tweaking of athletes' training so that it matches them a little bit better. But what athletes know and coaches know and have learned works, works. And there's many different methods. And as long as you understand kind of the madness behind the method, you can apply it to people in a way that can be successful. So I feel like if you are just scientific, you miss part of it. And if you're just sort of a robot and just spitting out canned plans, I think you miss part of it as well. I think it's gotta be the blend of the two. And then the ultimate, of course, is if you can become a coach in the way that you're able to inspire and motivate athletes to do something beyond what they think they can do. And that's the fun of it, but that to me is the ultimate, is if you can get to that point where you can sort of tweak things and use the science and the general principles and take what you've learned from the best coaches around it, but then connect on a level with athletes so that they begin to believe something that if you told them in the beginning, they think you're crazy.

Preach, brother, preach.

We're going to spend plenty of time on the magic for sure, but I do want to go back to the foundation of McMillan Running. Where did that start? What was the genesis for you of your coaching business? And what would you say are your core training principles within McMillan Running?

Well, I got lucky in that I was coaching an Olympic development team in the late 1990s, early 2000s. And when that ended, there were still people that wanted to work with me. And some people that thought I knew what I was talking about because I worked with fast runners wanted to work with me. And so I set up mcmillanrunning.com at that time, pretty early in the online coaching world. And it's just sort of, I thought it would be a part-time business because my wife was getting her PhD and I knew we were probably going to be moving around with her job. And it ended up being more than a full-time job. And so it's kind of grown from there. So it was really just the result of people being interested in working with me, that I needed a platform to do that. And the philosophy is kind of the blend like we've talked about. It ultimately is, we know these general principles that work for training athletes for each different distance and each different sort of duration of races that they may be doing. But then we also know that people are kind of unique in their own physiology and their psychology. So we need to take that into consideration. And then people, you know, the bulk of the people we work with are busy professionals. And so you've got to balance what you ideally would do with what can fit into their life schedule and being able to move it around. And so the work that I do sort of tries to work underneath this umbrella of the general principles with a lot of tweaking of things to specifically help athletes with their unique nature and then making that fit into their life schedule in a way that is motivating and maintains motivation and builds their motivation and confidence. Because if you can get them decently fit, but then really confident and excited about their race, then you've got a great chance of having them go out and achieve their goals.

So starting on the general training principles, and let's assume for a second we're talking about those going longer distance. We have a lot of half marathoners and marathoners who listen to the show. From a kind of core physiological principles standpoint for those training, for those distances, what are the things that you point to? What are the three or four things that you think matter there?

The first thing is they have to have muscular durability because the bulk of completing those longer races, particularly if they're going to take a long time doing those races, they just need to have the musculoskeletal system that can handle it. That's why consistent weekly volume in the long runs and all of those things are really helpful in building a musculoskeletal system that can tolerate it. Then secondly, they have to be physiologically prepared for the demands of the event. If you're going to race for two, three, four, five, six hours, then you need to be prepared to be really efficient at running at your goal pace. You need to be prepared to fuel and hydrate at those paces for the duration. You need to have some exposure to the mental suffering that will be inevitable in those races. You have to be okay with that and look forward to that. The training is set up to get you muscularily prepared, get you metabolically prepared, but then also to get you mentally prepared for that. The regular training that we do, the weekly volume, the long runs, the race-specific type workouts that we do, some of the workouts where we really want to challenge the athlete. Mentally we do those and just things to help them essentially be prepared so that race day is not a new experience. It's more of an exciting experience and is not so scary, I guess.

I love that you say that. We preach on our side a lot, what does the race require? And many of the foundational principles we utilize here at Rogue follow from that, which don't always fall nicely and neatly into these energy system boxes, right? They're a lot more about when the shit hits the fan, how do you deal? How do you adjust? What do you do? So talk to us a little bit. You have a lot of experience working with people in the flesh, face to face, and you now have this unbelievably successful business working with people primarily, virtually. What are the nuances and challenges with those two different techniques? Many of our listeners, some of them train with us in live and in person, and then others are already, they may even be McMillan running customers already. They might be interested in knowing how you as a coach and how you plan for that sort of virtual versus physically present dichotomy that's out there.

Well, it would be ideal to be in-person with everyone. That's obviously lovely to do. It's just not practical when you're, we're a global company, so we have athletes around the world. So it's obviously just not possible to do that in the flesh, as you say, is great because you have the hands-on sort of while they're doing the workout and you can speak with them when everything is sort of, you're at the track or you're finishing the long run and you can put your eyes on them. So that's always nice to help a coach, you know, because a lot of coaching is visual and auditory. So you're watching athletes and you can see how they look and how they're changing across a run. And then you're listening to them and what they're saying and how they're saying things to try to get feedback and that's pretty immediate when you're in the flesh. So that's a lovely situation and it's fun, obviously, to get together with runners that way. But online, you know, one of the things that's nice about running is a lot of it is just doing the work. It's just putting in the workouts and getting the runs in and so having the correct delivery of the training plan and the feedback mechanisms so that they're able to kind of answer those questions virtually that you would ask them in person seems to work pretty well for people. And so many people have life schedules that just don't facilitate them getting to scheduled workouts with the local running group or they may live in a place where there isn't even a running group. And so I think the online provides a nice option or they may just may want to work with somebody that's doing something different than what they've been doing and so online can work. Both are very successful. I enjoy doing both, but it's just the nature of the beast that I can't be in multiple places at one time, but it is really cool to be working with athletes across the world.

How do you get in somebody's head in a virtual environment? We have a podcast based training group and we interact with them through virtual tools, but not seeing them in workouts, not seeing how they respond in those tough moments in a workout. Sometimes it can be hard to know where somebody's mental space is and you talked about the importance of that. What's your experience with that in a virtual environment?

A lot of it is reading between the lines, isn't it? That you're really trying to tease out from that person's responses and the questions that you're asking that you start to tease out. Why maybe if they had a poor run or workout, why was that? You've got some history with them as to what their life schedule might have been leading into it. You're trying to tease that out and usually, if you've got enough exposure to that person, you can start to see from their feedback that they're giving you where their mind is. I got one guy that just had an unsuccessful marathon and he was really beating himself up about it. And then I was able to say, well, let's just go back a little bit. And look, you missed this key workout because of a work situation. And then you got sick, you were supposed to do this workout on this day and then you moved it to the next day, but then you weren't able to fuel like you normally would. There were all these sort of reasons and then we were able to sort of back him away from the cliff so he wasn't beating himself up too much. So a lot of it is just constant communication and figuring out what's going on with them and where you need to help them. Because some people are really anxious and nervous and worried about their training. So you have to communicate with them a little bit differently than maybe somebody who's kind of, you know, they have high goals, but their lifestyle and their commitment to it doesn't quite match that. So you have to maybe try to help them get and stay a bit more motivated and disciplined in their training. So again, kind of reading between the lines is kind of what I try to do, at least.

Jumping to the monster you created that is the McMillan Calculator, I would imagine there are moments when you regret even putting that out to the world. But it is a useful tool, something we certainly use with our runners and, you know, has evolved through the years from its beginning, in my understanding, in your graduate training. So talk about where the genesis of the McMillan Calculator, what has evolved to, and how you tell people to use it, because I know there's a lot of people that probably want more from it than really can provide.

Well, again, coming from my selfish needs, when I was first started coaching, I coached as I do now, a really wide range of runners. So some people that were much slower than I am, and some people much faster. It's fairly easy to provide pace guidelines for somebody who's your same speed, because all the pacing makes sense to you. But if somebody's way faster or way slower, it gets more difficult because you don't know from your own experience what that would feel like pace-wise. So I was looking at all of the existing ways that coaches were coming up with pace guidelines for workouts and training, and then also race predictions so that I could help athletes know what pace would be appropriate for races. There are a lot of good ones, but there wasn't one that I felt like had everything. And then, based on what I was doing for my graduate research, which was a little bit more teasing out the individual differences in runners and connecting that with these different thresholds and capacities that we all have and how they may be different between each other. That sort of was the genesis of me going, well, wait a minute, I think I can do this myself and create something that I feel like would work for me. And I did this in Excel and I just had a notebook. In fact, I still have this binder that has just like 300 pages of times and paces and all of it. Is kind of how it started. And so it was old school because when I started doing coaching, it was faxing things back and forth. So you just open the binder and find the person's performance ability and pull out their paces for their workouts and that. And then in 2001, a buddy of mine who's a programmer, we put it on an article that I had written, the six steps of training, which is still on my website. And it was on page three of that article. It was like, oh, and here's the calculator that I use when I'm coaching athletes. And then maybe a year later, my buddy who had programmed it, he said, have you seen the stats on this page? What is on this page? And I was like, I don't know. And so we looked and it was the calculator. And so it had become popular and I think it got on some forums and message boards that it was there. And so we kind of evolved it in that it's more and more moved to the front page now. And it's been evolved, you know, I've continued to get feedback and there's probably been five iterations of it where tweaking things to make it a little bit better and more useful to people.

When you talk about tweaking, I think our listeners, they're a pretty training focused group. What kind of tweaks are you talking about? You know, your calculator, for some folks, gets a bit of a bad rap as being weighted to marathon, half marathon specificity and away from like, you know, somebody who runs a marathon, how in the world are you going to get their 200 meter equivalency time? You know, talk a little bit about those adjustments that you've done and sort of maybe a little bit of the criticism people have had about it and how you deal with that. I mean, obviously nothing's ever going to be perfect no matter what, but give us a little bit of that history.

Well, you have to understand that the prediction, it's a predictor, right? It's an estimate. It's not written in stone. It's not always correct, though for a lot of people it is, but some people it's not. And you have to understand that the farther you get away from what you've been doing, the less predictive it will be. And so certainly, I'll have high school kids who, they're normally just fast, but they have no endurance. That's just sort of the nature of being a new runner in high school. And they can run the 400 and 800 times, but they'll never get close to the two miles. So they're like, your calculator sucks. And I'm like, well, no, I think you just need more endurance. And that's the problem. And so this is illuminating that you lack endurance. And then the same thing if people come into the sport and do half marathon and marathon, but they've never really done a lot of speed work or focus on running a fast 5k or 10k. They may have run them during half marathon or marathon training. And so it's difficult for them to meet the predictor possibly. And you're like, well, yeah, why don't you take a season and focus on 5k, 10k and see if you can bring it in line. So it's just a matter of understanding that it's an estimate and it's a tool to illuminate, give you another data point that you and your coach can use to kind of identify where are your strengths, where are your weaknesses. And it's been tweaked over the years to be, we added Ultra to it, which introduced a whole new set of potential and problems too. And then the actual algorithms that are behind it have been adjusted. And because now I think we're closing in on 20 million runners have used it. So there's a lot of sort of data from the usage and then we have feedback and knowledge from the athletes that we coach as to what they're finding works and doesn't work. So, and then the layouts changed a little bit to try to make it a little more user friendly. And we, it started as a real coaching tool and now it's become a runners tool. So, we had to adjust for that and then GPS watches really became popular. So, we used to give everything in split times for like repeats, but a lot of people, particularly if they never ran in high school or college, they'd never do anything in split times. They do everything in pace. So, we had to present pace now as well. So, just again, feedback from runners, what they want, what they don't. We try to help if we can.

So, Greg, one of the questions I get all the time from athletes is, when I'm using the calculator, do I use goal paces or do I use current fitness level paces when deciding what to do in a workout? And obviously, as a coach, when I get those questions, I can have more complex conversations with people and I know a little bit of their history so I can direct them in one direction or the other. Sometimes we find a place in the middle. What do you tell athletes that might not have a coach on that question?

The way the McMillan calculator is designed is that it's designed to use your current fitness to establish your training paces. And those paces are not to get you to your current fitness level. The paces are actually designed, and this is part of the sort of the method behind the madness, is that they're designed to stress your system at the optimal level to get an adaptation to take you to the next fitness level. So you use your current fitness level, and the training paces that come from the calculator are based on that. And they will give you the right amount of stimulus to take a next step in your fitness development. And the goal pace information is used primarily for goal pace workouts, obviously, and prediction of other race performances. So you know, oh, if I want to run an hour and 50 minutes for the half marathon, what do I need to get my 10K at? So really, the current fitness is the main thing that the paces are derived from. And then the athlete, typically, you know, every one to three months, they'll be doing races, intermediate races, and hopefully improving. And then they can adjust their paces from that. And that's why I had to add the goal fitness question to the calculator. Because people were putting in their goal fitness as their current fitness. Well, then it's providing paces to actually make them faster than their goal. And then some people, particularly if they had a fair amount to improve, they would actually be overtraining if they were using those paces. So adding that question kind of helped people get a little bit more dialed in.

It's like people cheating the VDOT system that, you know, so many people do that, they say, oh, my VDOT, then they cheat it. And then they get hurt or they get overtrained or whatever happens.

Yeah, it's hard because we're sort of, we like to order our performances, right? We'd like to have a menu and, you know, it's Boston Qualifying. Well, that's the performance I want, or I want to break a certain time period. That's the performance I want. And that's somewhat arbitrary and not necessarily in line with what is doable. And so people can get into a situation where they're over training and not in an optimal zone, which leads to the injuries and the burnout and all that.

Another question from this, you know, as you mentioned, a lot of people who are looking at the paces for their marathon or half marathon times and trying to hit in a race some of the faster end of the spectrum times, it can become difficult, especially if they're an athlete that's primarily focused there. You know, a lot of the runners we train here in Austin come into the sport and they go straight to the long stuff. And that's kind of become where their strengths lie and they have trouble hitting the lower end of the lower or the faster ends of the range. Yeah, so as it relates to this question of individual strengths versus just a weakness that needs to be developed or given some stimulus, how do you know the difference? If that makes sense, how do you know if something's just an individual sort of strength that needs to be flexed versus a weakness that needs to kind of be massaged or avoided versus just a blind spot that they haven't worked on enough to know the difference? If that makes sense.

It does make sense. And a lot of it comes down to the experiences that the runner has had. So if they, you know, like Steve and myself, we ran from when we were little all the way until we were older. And so we ran shorter distance races all the way up to longer distances. So, you know, that's sort of a lot of information that can tease out these individual things. And boy, I really do well with this type of workout and not with this other. But if you have a new runner or somebody who's sort of only participated in one sort of type of race, like a longer race, then a lot of times they don't have that information. So, you have to give them a variety of workouts and as a coach, sort of tease out, how are they responding to that type of workout? How are they recovering from that workout? How are they adapting to that workout? And, you know, that's a lot of what the book You Only Faster is about, is like teasing, learning, asking the right questions to figure out for that athlete. Is this something that they just haven't done and they need to do more of it? But then once they do more of it, okay, is this something they're really good at or are they not as good at? And, you know, are they able to run toward the faster end of the pace range or are they at the slower end of the pace range? And that gives us some information that helps us kind of tweak it. Obviously, the more experience the runner has, the more varied in their experience, the easier it is to kind of tease that out. But it kind of goes to what coaches are always saying to athletes, which is be attentive to your body when you're training. And start to see these trends. And particularly like you guys, you have a big group, right? And so athletes can say, wow, on this type of workout, I'm able to run with my training partner. This one, I'm in front of my training partner. This one, I'm behind my training partner. She's much faster than I am at the half marathon, but I can stay with her at the 5K. So this begins to tease out these sort of strengths and weaknesses of the runner, which gives a little bit more, for the runner at least, it helps them kind of explain why they either do really well or typically why they don't do as well. But as a coach, it also helps you know how to kind of change the ingredient mix in the recipe to get the end result a little bit better. So you're not having athletes do training that's not in a cord or meshes with them. It's sort of the ideal training to match their physiology and psychology. If you do that, they typically will have more and more frequent successful workouts, which builds their confidence and as a coach, that's what you want going into races.

Yeah, getting those positive feedback loops that make it easier and easier to give them the results they're looking for to be having those good starting line experiences. Yeah, it's amazing that your tool, it's just algorithms and plugging numbers in is able to pull such nuance out of just those set numbers. For all our listeners out there who are still on the coaching fence, Chris and I are always like, find a coach. We don't care who it is, but find a coach. That's what good coaches do. They are able to take those numbers and make them mean something that really can play out for them in results.

That's why we added, in the calculator now, there's a Speedster button and an Endurance Monster button, so there's even more teasing out of the speed you should use based on your runner type once you figure that out. There's also an article on the site about a hybrid calculator. Maybe, for certain types of workouts, you need to use your long-distance performance times and then for shorter, maybe you use a different performance time, so there's again just trying to provide a better and better tool for athletes.

Are you still a track and field fan or are you jaded by this world that we... Since you and I have been in this sport, there have been question marks since the 90s about what's going on in our sport, but you were a coach to an elite group for a long period of time and you ran at an elite level. Are you still a fan or are you now like, I could take it or leave it, it doesn't really matter?

I think I sort of go between each end of the spectrum. I love the sport, I love competing, I love knowing what athletes go through to get ready. I mean, Desi winning Boston, how can you not be a fan of that? I was just so incredible and you have those experiences. But it is hard to sort of, you just can't ignore the constant negatives of people cheating. Certainly when I was doing the pro team, they hurt us because I was always telling the athletes, they're not keeping you from running fast. That was my answer whenever the topic came up. But ultimately they took away opportunities. And so the sport is about sponsorship and if you win or you place higher, those things make a difference. And if you're a winner, then you get invited to other things. And if somebody that's a cheater wins and you're second or third or fourth or fifth, then you don't get invited. And so it's really tough for sure. So I don't know. I don't have a good answer to that. It depends on the day. I'll be excited one day and then something will happen and I'll be like, so frustrating.

Well we jam this fan stuff down our listeners' throats. We spend the first 15, 20 minutes of every episode telling them what just happened in the world. And we learned over the last couple of months to put a little station mark when we're done with that period so people can listen to the tech talk stuff if they want to jump to it. But we can't stop. Chris and I can't stop being fans. I'm way less jaded. I guess for me it's always been they're either doing it or they're not doing it. There's no way I can catch them. Chris is a more nuanced fan where he gets a little more, he takes it a lot more personal. I just think there's a whole bunch of cheaters out there and each person has to make their decision on how they're going to play with it. As you think about the experiences that you had as a pro coach, things are getting crazy in the US now, aren't they? The playing field that you and I were operating on as coaches of elite groups, which you were definitely an elite group and my group was more of a sub-elite group, but the playing field has completely changed. The level of athlete coming out of the college ranks and the heights that we're seeing, especially on the women's side, athletes competing at from the 1500, 800 all the way up to the marathon, it's a pretty exciting time for American distance running. Do you still feel confident that in the US, generally people are doing it the right way?

I don't know. It's difficult to know for sure because you just hear so much stuff and it's overwhelming. But I think that there's a lot of people that are doing it the right way that are having a lot of great success. And so that's what you come back to, right? Is that you know this person, this coach, this training group, they're doing it the right way and they're having great success and they prove that you don't have to do those things to have that success. And so certainly there's been an ongoing gathering of good athletes, with good coaches, with good support, and a lot of belief that they can go out and run really well. And that's happening. And that wasn't the case certainly when we were in our infancy of starting our groups and trying to do what we could do to help US distance running.

But you've coached elites and now adult athletes of all levels. How are they the same and how are they different?

They're more the same than they're different. The sameness is they still go through the same emotional roller coaster that is training for a big goal, though somewhat theirs is more stressful because they have financial obligations and opportunities on it that the rest of us don't. That whole building of an athlete from where they are to where they want to go and working with them across that is very, very similar for both. The circumstances can be different for sure. The biggest difference, of course, is just the speed. Everything is so fast and everything is the percentages of improvement are so low and what you're trying to tease out. Then how can you do that from a physical standpoint, but then you also have to feed the mental standpoint, figure out what that athlete needs to be able to go to the next level. And some of them, I would say in the group that I did, the biggest challenge that we had, because we never got the superstar athletes out of college. We were always tier two, tier three, tier four athletes and trying to move them up. The biggest challenge we had was mental in that I could get them really, really fit, but they had sometimes that would be, I could get them fitter faster than physically than I could mentally. And so they would rush up against competing against people or hearing split times that were scary. And so trying to get them to be comfortable with carrying those splits or racing against those people or being in front of those people in races was a big part of it. So I think that they're more similar. And that's one of the things I feel like new runners figure out when they do talk to faster runners, is they're like, wow, they have the same struggles that I do. I thought every run was magical for them. I thought every run was amazing. They never had a bad workout or a race and it just, they make it look so easy. It didn't seem like they were suffering when they were doing the race and they kind of begin to see. And this is why runners stand around talking to each other after races for hours because it is this commonality in what we experience. Yeah.

I've found in my experience interacting with elites that they're, they have more insecurities than the adult athletes I've been exposed to.

And it, it's always, Well, in some way they have, sorry to interrupt, somewhat they have to be freaks, right? They have to be unusual to do what they're trying to do. So you do definitely get some characters.

But it is, but the ones that you see have success, you know that a big part of the difference is the mental component. You know, those that are able to dial in that result when they are ready from a fitness standpoint. So let's talk about the mental training side of things. We did a big mental training series with this podcast. We talk about in a lot of different ways how to prepare your mind for your goal race. What are the things you emphasize?

Well, number one is to be comfortable with the suffering and to accept that if you're going to race at your highest ability, to have a peak performance, you need to accept that it's going to be uncomfortable and you have to be okay with that. Because a lot of athletes, you know, we always want to feel great throughout the race. And a lot of feeling great throughout the race is having an expectation that it's going to be very painful. It's going to be a lot of suffering. And so, the more you can get them sort of on board with that idea, then when the suffering does come, it's not a shock to the system, they're better able to handle it. So, a lot of the training is let's dial in how to run comfortably at your race pace, but then also put them in situations where they are suffering in a similar way or maybe it's smaller doses, but they're having exposure to the mental challenges that will come in the race. And if you can do that, then the race itself, it shouldn't be that difficult for them mentally. And then the final component, which I think this is what we try to do as coaches, is that we're trying to get that athlete so motivated, so confident, so excited to go out there and do their best at a realistic but yet challenging goal that they have that advantage going into the event that they are just so excited about the race and what may come.

You know, Greg, over the last five, six years, I'd always used, I'd always done lots of quality workouts in long runs. I'd always knew that that was crucial for marathon and half marathon success. But I was having athletes, like, kind of not finish races out in the way that I thought that they were capable of from the myriad of workouts we did and all the things I thought that indicated clearly they were ready to race to set a certain goal time. And then I just got to the point where I was like, okay, there's something I'm missing here. And sort of went back to brass tacks and went through all my, all the people who are have been key influences for me, and you're one of those folks. And I went back through some of your stuff and I realized how critical and crucial your idea of fast finishing is, not just from a physiological standpoint, but really, really from a psychological standpoint. I call it a close. We like to close out the last 20 minutes or 30 minutes of a run. Sometimes I'll even extend it to 45 depending on where we're at in a cycle. But that was just a complete game changer for the way my athletes perform now, because I had a lot of the physiological boxes checked off, but they were failing late in races. Some of that is physiological. I do know we weren't doing enough 20-plus mile runs and I kind of changed that too, but talk a little bit about how you came up with the idea of a fast finish or a close and how that nuance of the physical and the mental fall in in one piece to having a workout that, in my opinion, like a desert island workout, man, this is one you've got to have in your cycle or you're in deep trouble.

No kidding. Well, coach has been doing it for years and several that were influential on me had their athletes doing it and you talk to athletes about it. And I started sort of doing it with the first pro group, it was sort of part of the programming. And you started to see like how an athlete ran a fast finish or this sort of closing part that's fast, how they ran that and how did that correlate with the race. And so what I found, which is no surprise and coaches have known this, who trained athletes for years, was that the ones who really would push themselves harder in that last 10, 15, 20 minutes and began to look forward to pushing themselves harder and almost, it's almost like a game to them of how fast can they run the last bit, how much can they suffer at the end. Those are the ones better able to tolerate the races. And so again, it kind of goes back to this is what you're going to experience in the race. So we better have some doses of it through the training process so that it isn't that uncomfortable. And you knew when you got an athlete who could run faster at the end than they had before and they were sort of excited to do it, they sort of were excited about the challenge of it, then that was a really good sign that they were ready to go. And Brett Goetcher, he was one of the athletes I coached, he ran 210 in the marathon. And we would do those up here, we're at 7, 000 feet and he'd be on the ground at the end. They're just laying down trying to recover. And you know that they just got a really big mental stress during that. And it doesn't last forever, right? Like you say, it's just the last few minutes of the run there, but that really helps them in the race. So I found it wasn't, you know, the physiology is one thing, but the mental part is just so important. And you mentioned it, that these athletes who have really long and really great careers like Meb and Dina and Desi and I think Shalane and you know, some of those, they just have this mental component that seems to be slightly different and they're okay with the ebb and flow of training and racing. And they certainly look forward to the challenge in each race and seeing if they can meet it.

You also talked about race specific workouts. Give us some examples from maybe one from the marathon, one from the half marathon of race specific workouts, whether they be within a long run or during the week that really help people dial into preparing for their goal.

I think for both the half and the marathon, that fast finish or closer idea that Steve was talking about are, like you say, those are, you got to have those and you got to nail those, but you got to be prepared to nail those. So you got to do some prep work to get ready, you know, some fitness building and build up to where you can really challenge yourself. So that's certainly one. I think pace practice runs, you know, usually for the marathon, that's a continuous run at marathon pace. For the half marathon, it could even be multiple repetitions at marathon pace, you know, like three times three miles or something like that at their half marathon pace. So depends on the athlete, obviously, but doing some race specific or goal pace type workouts, I think is very good. But again, that all has to fit into the overall philosophy of the program. So typically what I'm doing is it's sort of, and this goes back to Arthur Liddiard, who I was lucky enough to be around. His thing ultimately was do the training so you can do the training so you can finally do the training that you need to do to achieve your goal. And so a lot of us, we're not at step three, we're at step one or two. So you have to do some prep work to get ready to be able to do your best. So for example, if you took a new runner and in the first week of their training program, had them do a fast finish long run, it won't be as of high quality as if you do some prep work beforehand and maybe, you know, four weeks or eight weeks later, they do their first one, then they'll perform better in that workout. So to me, it's about getting ready to do that race specific training so it can be of its highest quality.

You mentioned Liddiard, obviously that's a huge inspiration for all of us coaches in the distance running world. What did he teach you?

Well, a lot. I don't know. It is a big question. Certainly I think that his philosophy, which was sort of an evolution of previous philosophies is the base that we use for our coaching philosophy. And I knew a lot of that from reading his books and stuff. And then when I got together with him and spent a lot of time that it was sort of reinforcing the things that I'd learned from the books. But what I ultimately, and everybody needs to read, all coaches should read the books, right? And kind of get that. But I would say that what was most interesting was that number one, he would give a slightly different answer to what appeared to be the same question to two different runners who appeared to be the same. And that's where I started to see he was listening for some cue that that runner was talking about to provide them with what they were missing. And again, going back to this individual nature, because literature is always talked about in a very sort of rigid way, right? You have to do this, you have to do this. And I found that wasn't the case. He had a lot of wiggle room within these general principles. That really reinforced that idea to me. I also, he's kind of like Joe Vigil. These are guys that just are so motivating to you. You would just run through a brick wall for them. I don't know what it was about him, but he just had that thing. And so you realize that he probably could have had any training system and he still would have had successful athletes because he was just so motivating and it showed that as a coach, and I mentioned it before, if you can become a trusted partner who is able to motivate and influence somebody to believe that they can do something bigger than maybe they believe, that was a big part of it too. So I would say what was great about it was it sort of reinforced what I'd learned from the books and talking to other people who had been around him. But then what was neat was just sort of teasing out the differences with different people and motivation and I mean what an honor it was. I mean Steve, you saw him during that trip when he was in Texas. It was just fantastic.

Yeah, you got to spend the, I got to meet him at the, I guess it was literally a week or two weeks prior to his passing.

Yeah.

And he was as, I was absolutely shocking to me that he passed because he was vivacious, excited, able to roll with the punches, able to answer any questions we had. But I noticed that too and this is the little window I had to talk to him is how he talked in generalities but it felt like it was very specific to individuals and the more you got to ask him a specific question, he gravitated towards that. He gave an irascible sort of non-sequiturary answer to the general group but he would be willing to share much more freely about it in individual context which as you say, that's like what magical coaches can do. I had an opportunity to run and train with Joe Vigil for a number of months and that was an absolute game changer for me as well. As you said, anybody would do anything for that man. He has the ability to pull magic out of people.

That's why I always struggled as a coach because I had been around those guys and I was just like, I don't know if I can do that. I don't know if I can be that person or not. They were just so exceptional and what an honor to be around those guys for sure.

Such different ways of doing it because even though they both, even Coach Vigil was very much influenced by Lydyard, but he didn't do it himself. He was an old football coach and an old football player. Lydyard had started his running career much later as he was an adult, just trying to get himself fitter and get into a fitness position in here. Yeah, I agree with you. When I got the opportunity to sit with Coach Vigil, I was always very intimidated. But the good thing about Coach Vigil, it always made you realize you were an N of one. You were just this one person who he wanted to share with. Coach Vigil was just that way.

Like Lyddiard, he came through that era where guys didn't share their training very much. Igloy and those guys, right? There's no good history on those guys because they was all secretive. Vigil and certainly Lyddiard, I'll tell you what I do. Here's exactly what I do.

Good luck.

They're just sharing that way. It's wonderful.

Well, the good coaches have the ability to look into their runner's soul and tell them what they need to hear in that moment to get them to believe, because sometimes it's much about believing in what you're doing as it is about what you're actually doing. How does that play out of that kind of concept play out in your training and your coaching with athletes?

Well, ultimately, that's the bottom line is between the years. Do they believe, can you get them motivated, excited and believe enough into what they can do? It comes in different forms. You have the objective stuff of the paces they can hit or the times they've run in tune up races. We have that component, but you also have the component of just learning how to motivate the athlete or what you know will motivate the athlete. Do you need to pat them on the back a lot? Do you need to cut them in the pants a lot? It kind of depends on the athlete sometimes. All of that ultimately getting them to… What's interesting in running is there's so much worry and anxiety about will I achieve when they go into races. Sometimes the coach ultimately just serves as the vessel that sits there and says, yes, you can do that. That's just the reinforcement the athlete needs because they are just worried about it. But if they know somebody else believes they can do it, then that often will help.

Don't tell the American Psychiatry Society or whatever it is that we are actually therapists. We're all getting big, big trouble for that. We're going to wrap this up with one question. We're about to announce a book club that we're sort of going to be pushing over the next couple of months, which is an online book club called the Endorphin Book Club. In that regard, I wanted to ask you a question about maybe key running books or even books that are not running specific, that our listeners might get something out of or might glean something from to help them raise their running game. Do you have any one or two or three books that you might recommend?

Yeah, I think any illiterate stuff is really good to read. Then I think it's good to read Jack Daniel's book because it does a nice job of bringing in the science component of it. Then I would say Jerry Lynch, I really like his work. He did the Total Runner, which is out of print now, but he does a lot of the psychological stuff, which I think is really good too. Then some of the current things, Matt Fitzgerald has some good books and those kind of guys that are a little bit newer are often doing a good job of consolidating the information from older references in the past. Steve Magnus, some of those guys, they're doing the synopsis, they're doing the research work to pull it together. I think that David Martin and Peter Coe's book, Better Training for Distance Runners, it's pretty heavy on the science side of things, but I think it's Chapter 3 or Chapter 4 that talks about ultimately building the training. I was lucky to be around David Martin quite a bit. He really had a good handle on the physiology and the psychology too. I think those would be Cornerstone books for sure. V. Hill's book is really good as well. Again, I could probably just keep going and going on the books that... The way I did it, to be honest, was I just went to used bookstores and I bought all the old books and I read those and then I would move to the newer books because a lot of times it's good to know what comes from where and you can learn to have your decoder ring. You're like, oh, well, Lyddiard is calling it a three-quarter effort run and then this guy is calling it a steady state run and this guy is saying this is like marathon pace run and so you could start decoding things.

Of course, you got to put you only faster on the list, I'm sure.

Well hopefully that's a little bit of a user-friendly workbook is how it was really designed to be. So hopefully it serves that purpose.

Yeah, and it does a good job, I think, of helping runners tailor their training to their individual strengths and weaknesses. So yeah, another good one to mention for sure. Of course, thank you, Greg, for joining us has been awesome. We really appreciate it.

Thank you. I love Rogue. I appreciate all that you guys have done. It's amazing and really inspiring.

The next time we're in the same city like Boston, we need to get together and have a meeting of the minds or something like that. Or just a few years.

Anytime.

Well, thank you, sir. And of course, everybody check out Greg's book, You Only Faster, and his website, mcmillanrunning.com for the great McMillan Calculator, as well as much, much more in terms of knowledge on training and articles and everything under the sun running training. So, thank you, Greg, for joining us. We'll talk to you soon.

You bet. You guys take care.

That was an awesome interview with Greg. As you said in our intro, Steve, is a little bit just reinforcing of everything we talk about and no, it's no coincidence that Greg is one of our influences as coaches. And you've had more direct exposure to him, but obviously we both stolen liberally from his programming and his philosophy. So it's always good to get that from the mouth of the man himself. But really cool. Also really cool for me to see just a little bit like Alex Hutchinson, the evolution from thinking about only the science to also recognizing that the mental component is such a big part of it.

Yeah, I agree. And one of the things about Greg that I've appreciated so much is his steady hand. And he just stays as consistent as consistent can be. And he's moved from an elite group to not having an elite group to having an elite group to not having an elite group. And now he's a goddamn entrepreneur. I mean, he's killing it from a coaching standpoint. And they've got it dialed in. And they know what they're doing. It's just as a friend, I'm so happy for him. And I'm surprised it took us this long to get him on the podcast, mostly because I think we were just... I don't know why, but he just reinforced 95 to 99.9% of what we talk about week in, week out here. And guys, if you don't know, the fundamentals of training are not that different. Everything is just keep doing the work, keep doing the work, miles matter. Listen to your body. I mean, he just went through all the key points. I mean, it's, you know, it's good stuff. Good stuff.

There you go. We'll wrap it with that. This has been episode 75 of the Running Rogue Podcast. As always, check us out at roguerunning.com or on Facebook, Twitter or Instagram at RogueRunning. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.