Hey, everybody, welcome to episode 374 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung, coming to you from a beautiful Friday afternoon here in Austin, Texas. Excited about this episode. It's going to be another solo conversation for you to listen to this week as I'm inspired and convicted, so to speak, to talk about the topic I'm going to be talking about today. I've been having a lot of conversations recently with athletes about how you define success in a race. And it's made me think about, along with some other things happening in the sport, it's made me think about the fact that we have a pretty narrow view of success in our sport. And I think maybe narrower right now in this given window of time than traditionally. But we've got a view of the sport that's very, very focused on time, where everyone's trying to get a PR, a personal best, in a race or from an elite standpoint, people are trying to set standards, beat records, and because of, perhaps it's because of the Super Shoe era, it's everything, everything seems to be focused on time. And if you don't get a certain time, then you are a failure. And I just, I want to broaden our definition of success for a lot of reasons. One, because it's important, I think, to frame success in a different way than just time, because there's a lot of different ways you can have success. But also because I think it helps take the pressure off, so to speak, a given day, so that you can have a lot of different ways to win. And I don't shy away from pressure personally, and I don't think pressure is necessarily a bad thing. But I think when we become so focused on one definition of success, then it can amplify that pressure in a way that turns into fear and anxiety that then perhaps affects the outcome that we want. And yes, you can deal with that in a lot of different ways, but I think one way you deal with it is redefining success and what that looks like. Also I want to expand this definition of success for us because I think it then opens up a whole other set of possibilities about how to enjoy the sport than maybe some people are focused on at the moment. So we'll talk about all of that as we dig into it. I don't really have anything other than that from an intro perspective, except I'll just remind you because we do have the beginning of fall racing training and builds coming very soon. We in Austin and Dallas, in our in-person groups, we're kicking off our fall race training on May 10th here in Austin and Dallas. And usually kick off our virtual training window first weekend in June for those that are training for fall races. So we're right around the corner from both our in-person training kickoffs and our virtual kickoffs for those that might be thinking about races in September, October, November in particular. And if you're interested in any of that, we do have an option for you, whether it's an in-person here in Austin or Dallas, or whether it's a virtual opportunity. We've got plenty of groups and one-to-one opportunities there. So don't hesitate to check out our website, roguerunning.com. Or if you're not sure, you can email us always at coaching at roguerunning.com to get information. If you're not sure what might be best for you, we can point you in the right direction. So go take a look at all of that. Otherwise, we're going to jump right into this conversation about how do we define and perhaps redefine success in our sport? Because I do think we've gotten this very narrow focus on times at the moment, and I want to expand our view. And so a couple of anecdotes that I've been thinking about that have me kind of thinking about this topic before I jump in, and I'm going to give you 10 different ways that we can define success when it comes to racing as the meat of this conversation. But before we get there, a couple of things I've been thinking about that have prompted this podcast. One is just comparing our sport to other sports. When we think about running versus a sport like skateboarding, for example, there's a stark contrast in how we view success. And if a skater is out there trying to get that perfect trick, then oftentimes they'll fail 50, 100, maybe more times than that, before they get that one successful trick, and they nail it and land on the board the way they want, with all the flips and spins that they want. But they've had 99% of their work, their reps, were failures. And maybe 1% was a success. And in that sport, that process, they didn't even really view it as failure. That process of nailing that trick is a part of it. Failure is built in. That is a part of the sport in a sense, and it's often celebrated as a way to measure how challenging something was. And to give you more of a payback when you do finally nail it, because of the journey to get there, was perhaps rigorous and challenging. And you'll see, you know, epic videos of all the failures of a trick before they nail that one. And it's just a very different view on failure in that sport than in our sport. Whereas, and maybe partially, this is because we don't get that many chances to race and to really go for certain times. Maybe in our sport, it's harder to embrace that concept of failure. But I think we need to. We need to embrace the idea that you might get a lot of reps at shooting for a certain thing before you finally nail it. And that is beautiful and necessary because you learn from each of those missed opportunities. And then ultimately, it makes it even more satisfying when you do get it. So that's one kind of sport that I think we could steal more from is skateboarding. And I was talking about this topic with James Dodds, one of our coaches here, who's been on the podcast many times. He was also relating it to surfing in a similar way, and added some nuance to this comparison that I thought was interesting. Because in surfing, it's kind of the same in a sense that you might hit a certain wave, or try to hit a certain set of waves a bunch of times before you really have that run that you can be proud of. And surfers embrace the idea that they're going to fall, and they're going to end up wet every time. They get up on the board, but there may be a lot of failure before they really have that wave that makes them feel the best. And that's okay, that's just a part of it. And the other thing that James kind of added to that conversation was that, you know, when a surfer is trying to hit a wave, yes, there may be a set of waves that's in the same spot that they're trying to hit that might have certain patterns and certain history in terms of the size and the scope of that wave and how it curls and how it flows and how quickly it moves and all those things. But every single wave is different, is unique. So if you're to get up on that wave or that, a wave in that area, each time you do it, it's going to be a different ride. It's going to look a little bit different. You're not going to be able to recreate probably anything you've done in the exact same way, because it's different. And in surfing, they embrace that because it creates and promotes the artistry of riding a wave that is also very fluid and flowy, meaning you have to take what the water is giving you. And as a part of that, you have to be stable, but also relaxed and fluid in your movements in order to really take advantage of the beauty of that sport. And yet in our sport, because we're running set distances and we're trying to achieve set times, then I think we have this perception that there is more similarity in one race to another than maybe there is, especially in the context of road racing. And I think we need to embrace the idea that every race is a different wave, so to speak. And even if it's on the same course and it's the same distance, it's different because the weather's different, the vibe's different, the dynamic's different. Your preparation to get to that point is different, and it's going to have a different look and feel. And yes, we're using similar standards to compare from one year to the next, or one time running that distance to the next. But there are more nuances to it than that because each time you face a distance, whether it's on the same course or a different course, there's something different. There's different variables. I think about the capital 10,000, which just happened this past weekend here in Austin. And it's the same course. It's been the same course for a long time. A pretty rolling, challenging 10,000 here in Austin, the biggest 10,000 in Texas. And this year, we had a windy day, but with cool temps in the 40s versus last year. It was a warm day with humidity and maybe no wind, but a very different scenario in terms of the challenges faced. And same course, two different years, but very different perspective on the times. And yes, I love celebrating fast times and PRs and beating yourself from one year to the next, but there's a lot more to it than that. And so we have to expand our definition of success because you're never really facing the same wave, even in running, where we have a lot of standards that we're trying to recreate from one race to the next or from one year to the next in the same race. So that's another analogy or comparison that I was kind of thinking about this week. And then the last one, which is more specific to our sport, is I was watching the Grand Slam Track event in Jamaica, their first meet of this new track series that Michael Johnson's putting on. You can go check it out if you haven't already. And one of the unique things about it is they have these eight person fields, and over the course of a meet, they're running two distances against each other. And so, in the case of the longer distance athletes, they were running at 5K and at 3K within the same meet, same eight athletes that are competing against each other. And so, that creates an interesting dynamic. They're also competing for a meet prize over the two races. That's $100,000, which is quite a lot of money for our sport. And I looked at the times that Grant Fisher, who won the distance portion of the meet with the 5K and the 3K, you look at the times that he ran, and it was pretty underwhelming. He ran the 5K, for an example, at 14.39, which he's run sub-13 a bunch of times at this point in his career. So this was well over a minute and a half slower than his fastest 5K, but he won the 5K at this meet and then went on to get what he needed in the 3K, albeit also a slower time than his normal, in order to win the meet and win the 100K. And so I was kind of thinking about that. I'm like, well, what does that look like from a success perspective for Grant Fisher? And initially it was kind of weird because the times were quote, relatively slow, but at the same time, he won the 5K. He did enough in the 3K to win the 100K, and he's walking away with $100,000, basically following the rules of the meet in order to get the job done and to define success as $100,000 on a weekend of work for him, which is amazing. But what does that leave us from a sport perspective that seems very focused on times and records at the moment? And in this case, I got to say, I kind of love it because it's to me much more interesting to have that racing dynamic where there are variables involved that are beyond just the pace lights and the standards and the pacers and the records. And yes, I do think Grand Slam Track has some tweaks to the model that they need to do to make it as interesting as it can be. But to me, it was actually refreshing to see a meet that was less focused on raw times and records and more focused on just pure racing. And for Grant Fisher, while those were some slower times for him relative to what he can do, he's walking away with $100,000. So that's pretty successful weekend of work from his perspective. And so my thought was, okay, well, what does that mean for the rest of us who are just going out and chasing PRs for the most part in our weekends of racing in our everyday running? So what does that mean for success for us? And what I would submit is that while looking at times and trying to run PRs and personal best is an important lens, it's not the only lens to which we should measure and judge success. And so I want to give us 10 other ways to think about success, which I hope will expand your view of how you're measuring your outcomes, which will hopefully also expand your ability to learn from those outcomes. So here we go. 10 things in no particular order, 10 ways to measure yourself, so to speak, and to claim success without necessarily having a personal best time. First one is sometimes just showing up to the start line is the victory. Sometimes just showing up to a start line is the victory. And I'm sure when I say that most of you are thinking about, well, if I'm doing a distance for the first time, maybe a first time marathon, first time half marathon, first time 10K, then claiming success might be in that situation, just getting to the start line ready to go, and to giving yourself a chance to finish that distance. And yeah, sure, that's a situation that I would think about in this context, but also there are others where even if you might have originally been going for a specific time in a race, that maybe the curve balls and the variables and the challenges that were thrown at you in racing meant that just getting to that start line healthy and ready to give yourself a chance is success. So for example, maybe you had a sickness, an injury, a personal stressful situation that popped up during your training that that affected your ability to go out and do the work for whatever reason. And maybe you were able to navigate that in a way that allowed you to still have that chance to get to the start line. And in doing that, you can claim victory because you overcame to give yourself a chance to toe the line and see what happens. And look, all of these definitions of success I'm going to share are ones that I've seen in my own coaching career and the athletes that I work with. There are people that can claim all of these definitions of success and wear them proudly. And there are plenty of athletes, experienced athletes, ones who still have dreams of PRs and things like that, who are able to claim victory by this simple definition of it. Maybe just getting to the start line and giving myself a chance was the success. And maybe whatever happens in the race after that is all the gravy on top that can also expand and create dimension around that definition of success, but maybe matters less than just getting to that start line. So that's number one. Number two, sometimes getting to the finish line, just getting to the finish line in whatever time it may be is your definition of success. And then this often comes certainly for those first time racers at a distance, first time half marathoners, first time marathoners, and always goal number one for athletes that I work with in those situations is let's finish. Goal number one, usually I also want them to finish strongly, which then picks up another definition of success that I'll talk about here in a minute. But sometimes getting to that finish line is the victory. And by the way, this also applies more broadly than just that first timer at a distance. Because sometimes stuff gets thrown at you in a race that makes it really, really hard to finish. And getting to the finish line is the victory. You know, for me, I think about my 2016 Boston when I ended up with a stress fracture in the race. Didn't know it was a stress fracture at the time, but I had this terrible pain in my Achilles heel and my Achilles area in the heel that felt like either some issue with my Achilles itself or some issue with the bone there. And ultimately I found out I had a stress fracture in my calcaneus, which is the heel bone. I would find that out later. But all I knew at the time was that it felt like at mile 21 of that race, that if I kept running, that something bad was going to happen. And so I stopped running for a little bit, started walking, thinking that that might make it better and walked for a few minutes, then started trying to run again. And it was, it was even worse. So I knew for sure that I shouldn't be running. I just had this gut feeling that if I did, that it would, that's something bad, something worst was going to happen. And so what I did was walk, because that's all I could do. And I was five miles from that finish line. And I knew that the as a practical matter, the fastest way to the finish line was probably to walk. But I also knew that I owed it to Boston in a sense to give everything that I had left on that day, which was walking as best I could over those final five miles. And that's what I did. And that was an incredibly emotional five miles. I don't necessarily recommend it, but it is also perhaps some of the most fulfilling and some of my most favorite miles on a race course in hindsight, because I was able to process all the emotion of what I was facing. Plus I was able to really soak in everything that was Boston as people tried to cheer and egg me on to run when I couldn't. And all I could do was receive their love and receive what they were trying to give me. And I couldn't give anything back except to just keep putting one foot in front of the other. And eventually I made it to that finish line. And while that resulted in the slowest marathon I've ever run, run in air quotes there, run walked, it was in many ways one of my most fulfilling marathons. And on that day, making it to the finish line, and even though I had aspirations to run one of my fastest marathon times that day, but it ended up being that making it to that finish line was the definition of success for that day. And that is a race that I am really, really proud of in hindsight, because I could have quit, I could have walked off the course, but I didn't. I did everything I could on that day to finish as best I could, and there was nothing more I could give. That's what my body had, my broken body had, and nothing more. And so that's what I gave. So on that day, the finish line was the success, not the time. So that's number two. Number three, another way of thinking about success is really leaning into having fun and enjoying the experience, and I want to clarify that when I'm talking about these things, I'm not necessarily talking about them as mutually exclusive definitions of success. I think a lot of these will layer on to each other, and you can have a lot of fun and still run really fast. And so it's much more nuanced than just saying these are ten different silos of success, and a race has to fall into one of them or another. I think multiple of these can go together, but I think sometimes we forget about this one, or we dismiss it in the sense that if you're focused on having fun, then you're not serious. But I think you can be focused on having fun and still be serious. I think you can also be focused on having fun and take that part of the equation really seriously. And speaking of Boston, for example, one of the things I talk to people about when it comes to racing Boston is that, especially in your first Boston, I believe it's important to make sure you enjoy the experience, that you soak it all in. And perhaps for some people that will mean not being so focused on racing hard or running a certain time, but rather really embracing the experience and enjoying it. And I remember having a conversation with a prior coach of mine when I was in Boston in 2014, the year after the proming, and I was not in a place where I wanted to race. I wanted to have an experience there that year. And I had talked to him about having fun that day. And the conversation that came back was a little bit surprising to me. He said, well, if you want to have fun, then you should be focused on having max fun. That you owe it to Boston to give everything to that intention. And to me, that's one thing about Boston is that whatever your intention is that day, you owe it to the race, the race history, and to the fans on the sidelines to give your all to that particular intention. And if you're racing, then give your all to racing. If you're trying to have fun and enjoy and soak in the Boston experience, then maximize that part of it. High five everybody. Read every sign. Maybe have every beer available on the course that you can. If that's something you do, really lean into having fun and enjoying the experience and soaking it all in. Because that can be a worthy and beautiful way to define success. Not just in Boston, but in other places, of really being that spectator within the race who's there to maximize the experience. And then I would say even in the case of trying to pair this definition of success, having fun with another definition of success, perhaps running a fast time, perhaps executing a good race, there's still room to have fun or at least enjoy the experience along the way. You know, Elliot Kipchoge talks about how smiling is an important part of the process. Experiencing the joy of racing is an important part of his experience in achieving fast times. And I think often for most of us, when we're relaxed, when we're enjoying ourselves, when we're smiling, that can unlock faster times, that can unlock more potential. And so these things are not mutually exclusive. They can come together. And certainly, your focus on what type of fun you want to have might color how these things work together. But often they can work together. And I think most of the time we think they can't. So if you're going to have fun in a race, have max fun. But then also, don't forget to enjoy the process if you have other definitions of success. So that's number three, have fun. Number four, another definition of success is being able to deal with the challenges of the race and perhaps having your worst day and still get through it all. Still stay in it. Still stay focused. I can tell you, this is an example of a definition of success as a coach that I get really, really inspired by. I get really inspired by people who are able to take things. They get thrown at them perhaps out of left field and they manage it and minimize the time lost or they're able to face it down and really, really overcome in the context of the race in a way that might not get them their fastest time but allows them to minimize the damage. And that can come in a lot of different forms. It can come from somebody who maybe faces cramping in a race or a side stitch and is able to work through it and manage it as best they can and then their pace doesn't fall off. I've had people trip and fall in races and get up, dust themselves off, find that groove again and then get back on it and maybe they lost some time and maybe their form is a little bit wonky after the fall but who stayed in it and kept fighting and were able to salvage a really solid time as a result. And this one brings up this idea that when everything goes smoothly, you don't necessarily really learn who you are. And we're all here to find out who we are. The reason we sign up for these things, the reason we listen to podcasts to learn how to do it better, the reason we travel to races and spend money, the reason we want to do marathons and big challenges like this is because it's hard. If we knew we could do it, then we wouldn't necessarily do it. We're looking for our edge. We're looking to learn what happens to us, who we really are when things are hard, when it gets dark, when you're not sure what can happen next. That's what we're signing up for. And so when you get thrown a curveball on race day, maybe you just have a crappy day. Maybe you just don't feel good. For whatever reason, it's not smooth, and you have to fight all the way. That's where we get to see who we are and what happens in those dark spaces. And so in many ways, it's the best when you get thrown a curveball, and then you have to fight and figure it out and get to that finish line in the best time anyway. And yeah, maybe it's not your PR, but you can look back at it and you can say, oh wow, I was able to face that down and minimize the damage and still come out with a really solid time, and I gave everything I had. I mean, that is an absolute picture of success, but we don't often think of it that way. We might be disappointed because the time wasn't what we wanted rather than focusing on what we're able to overcome in the moment. So that's number four, dealing with your worst day, and staying in it and staying strong. Number five, and this is one of my favorites, and it's really simple to measure, which is what I alluded to earlier for those first time racers, I love the idea of finishing strong. I love the idea of finishing strong as a definition of success, because this can manifest in a lot of different ways, but this idea that your last mile, or your last few miles, or your fastest miles of the race, regardless of your distance, that is success. That is magic. If you can learn to finish strongly, really on any scenario and any start, that is the definition of success. And usually, by the way, if you're trying to run a PR, then finishing strong and running a negative split is a part of it. That's usually sets you up for success. If you're running that way and a sign that you've had a good day overall, on the overall time. But also, it's a way to measure success, maybe when you're not sure or you're not ready to give your all on a given day. And so sometimes, the people have little injury blips, or maybe they got sick, or maybe they missed some time from training because of something got crazy at work or something like that. And they'll ask me, well, should I just go fun run this race and enjoy it? Use it as a long run? And I'll say, well, maybe. That's always an option. But I also like the idea of perhaps running a conservative race to a certain point and then trying to really push it over the final miles to at least reinforce the idea that, hey, I got something in me. I'm not ready to give 100% on the day, but I'm ready to give something, and I'm going to use it in a smart way to reinforce that ability to run fast and run strongly at the end. And so maybe if it's a half marathon, for example, you write out a plan where you start easy for the first three or four miles, and then you run marathon pace for a handful of miles, and then over those final three miles, you try to run a progression based on whatever you have left, with the single goal of that race perhaps being that your last mile is your fastest, and that no matter what, you commit to giving everything you have in that final mile, and seeing what time you can get. That is a magical way to not only claim success in a situation that is less than ideal, but also to reinforce that ability that, hey, I can close strongly. And so when you are really going for it across the entire race, that can come back to you. There's muscle memory there, so to speak, and there's also mental fortitude that comes, that you can carry with you into a situation where you are really trying to go for it for the whole race. And so finishing strong, last mile, fastest mile, there's so much magic in that, and it's really, really easy to measure that by just looking at the splits on your watch and looking at those metrics, because you'll know, did I do it or did I not? So that's number five. Finishing strong. Number six, racing, beating people. This is the Grant Fisher way of, yeah, maybe he ran one of the slowest 5Ks in a long time at Grand Slam Track this past weekend, but he won that 5K and he won $100,000. And so does his time really matter? No one's going to remember that, but they will remember that he won the 100K for the distance portion of that meet. And I think sometimes, since we're everyday athletes who aren't pro, and sometimes it's not as palpable who we're competing against, maybe we lose track of this idea of, hey, a race is a race is a race, or who cares what the time is, I'm going for it and I want to beat people. And that can manifest in a lot of different ways. It can manifest in wanting to get age group placing or age group podiums and hardware. It could manifest in trying to pass as many people as you can over the final miles or final stretch of a race. I have a friend who does this thing where he will track who he passes and who passes him over the final part of a race. And he gives himself a plus one for everybody he passes and a minus one in his head for everybody who passes him. And at the end, he adds it up and wants to know that he got as many pluses as he can in that equation. And that's a really simple way to just do it. And it works really well, especially in races with manageable numbers. But oftentimes, even in bigger races, you can go and look at it and they'll show you in the results what place you are at each part of the race. And did you move up? Did you pass a lot of people or were you passed? And if you're racing, if you're beating people at the end, then that is a measure of success regardless of whether you show up in the top of the age group results or not. And so, remember, we are racing. So at the end of the day, even if it's just over the final stretch and the people you see around you, regardless of whether they're in your age group or not, if you're just passing and beating people, going fishing as I like to say, you're passing as many people as you can and you're honest about it, then that's success. I mean, this is really palpable in the sport of cross country, for example, because team scores are based on places. And so oftentimes, if you're the sixth or seventh runner on a team in a cross country race, you don't score for the team because it's just the top five. But you still matter because sometimes you can move ahead of a fifth place score on another team and therefore push them down in their scoring or push them up because the numbers are additive in a way that drops them in the rankings. And so your place as a sixth and seventh runner in cross country still matters because it contributes to the team scores of other teams. And so if you're going down that homestretch in a cross country race, your goal is to pass as many people as you can regardless of where you are in the race because it matters for those team scores. And sometimes we lose track of that kind of concept in our big mass racing type environments, but they're still there and you can still define them in different ways, depending on the specific set up or scenario. But at a minimum, you can always track it yourself. Was I passing people more at the end or was I getting past? In whatever space I was in, that is a massive definition of success. So that's number six, racing hard, beating people. Number seven, how was I able to adjust to the weather and the challenges of the day? How was I able to adjust the weather and the challenges of the day? This dovetails a little bit with the one I mentioned earlier about dealing with your worst day and staying in it. But in this case, I'm talking more about what happens when it's hot? What happens when the weather throws you a curveball? What happens when it's, as it was for some of my athletes, 78 degrees and really humid at a 5K in Houston this past weekend? What if that happens? And you have to adjust and slow down accordingly, and therefore, maybe your time is slower than you ever run at that course or on that race, but you're still able to make the appropriate adjustments, stay in it, and then naturally give everything you have around that. And if I think about Boston, going back to the Boston example again, Boston is going to throw us challenges every single year that are going to manifest in various forms, often weather-related forms, where it might be hot, it might be cold, it might be windy, it might be raining, it might be all three cold, windy, rainy as it was in 2018. It might be sunny and hot and you're going to face a variable in springtime in Boston. You just are. I mean, one out of ten times, it's going to be perfect weather, maybe not even that. And so you're going to be throwing variables. And the question is, am I going to be someone who stubbornly sticks to the race plan that I want and hopes for the best, or am I going to make the smart appropriate adjustments and manage around those conditions and therefore, maybe run slower than intended because that is required by the conditions. And making those adjustments isn't a bad thing or isn't a knock on your performance. It's actually a plus on your performance. And yes, maybe the time is slower, but if you made those adjustments in a smart way and then finish strongly anyway, that's a better race perhaps than one where everything was perfect and you nailed it and you ran a faster time. I can tell you for me personally, when I think about the best race I've ever run, it's not necessarily my fastest marathon, but rather a race that was a couple of minutes slower than that, where the weather got up into the 70s and it was really hot. And I had to fight and manage through that and make some adjustments and ultimately run not that much slower than my PR, but on a much, much warmer day and much more challenging conditions. And when I think about it, in hindsight now, that was probably my best marathon. And while I'm still very, very proud of the PR marathon as well, for different reasons, that was a race that I ran on a perfect day in Houston on a perfectly flat course versus on a hot day on a challenging, slightly rolling course. And so when I compare the two in hindsight, my third fastest marathon is actually probably my best, because I was able to adjust to the weather, to the challenges on the day, and still get a solid result. So make those adjustments. Manage the conditions well. That is a beautiful measure of success. And one, in my mind, it actually demonstrates a higher level of mastery, because anybody can run good on a perfect weather day. But those that rise to the top, because they've made the right adjustments on a challenging day, that's where it's at. That's where you demonstrate the ability to have that black belt in this sport. So that's number seven. Adjusting to the weather and to perhaps the specific conditions and challenges of a given day. Number eight. What about just running a beautiful race? Running a beautiful race. And this one, perhaps a little bit amorphous, but let me put some definition on it. To me, running a beautiful race encapsulates perhaps, maybe, you know, this isn't its own specific definition of success, but it encapsulates all of the things that I'm talking about here, which is making the adjustments, rolling with the punches, executing your plan and the spirit of your plan well, and doing it in a way that, yeah, maybe the time matters, but maybe the time is less important than the how. And going back to Boston again, a course like that, it requires you to run a beautiful race. It doesn't require you, or I would say, those that try to run a hard race, or give their all in a David Goggins kind of way in Boston, tend to not be the ones that have success. But rather, those that roll with the punches, roll with the hills of the course, roll with the conditions, who execute not necessarily with a precise mile by mile plan, but rather with a more Zen Jedi-like plan that has them address each section of the course in a way that they're finding a rhythm and an effort in that section that is right. And then getting to that point after Heartbury Hill, where you see some of those downhills late in the race, and you're able to really open up and take advantage of it and pass everybody and have a strong finish over those five, last five miles. That's what Boston requires to have a great day is to run a beautiful race, not necessarily to run a hard race or a max effort race. It requires much more nuance than that. And as I said in a message this week to an athlete, it's the difference between forcing it and using the force in a Jedi sort of way, because it's more cerebral. It's more Zen. It's more yin and yang. It's about flowing with the rhythm of what's required or what's thrown at you at the different sections and being able to manage each in a beautiful way and in a unique way, and then give everything you have at the end when that opportunity presents itself. So that's another definition. Did you run a beautiful race? Number eight. Number nine, precision in execution. Number nine, precision in execution. So being able to measure how well you executed your stated plan, to me, is a massive definition of success. It also allows us in situations where we may not be at our A game in a race. It allows us to open up how we measure success or open up how we consider racing. And so, yes, there's one version of this that's, hey, I have a specific plan, a mile by mile plan, so to speak, and I want to be able to execute that as well as possible. And was I able to do that? Not necessarily with perfection and 100% precision, but within the spirit of it. So for example, with a quote textbook marathon plan, I often tell people, you know, to start 30 seconds slower per mile than your target pace, and then work down over the first three or four miles, then hold that rhythm as well as you can until mile 20 or 21, and then try to progress a little bit each mile from there to that finish line to have that true negative split. And so how were you able to execute that plan? Or if the course is more nuanced than that, like Boston, you know, how are you able to execute each section as you define it? Were you able to make the adjustments based on the course or not? Were you able to set yourself up for success to finish with a negative split and to run strong at the end? And in the case where you might not be giving your all, but rather maybe pulling back for whatever reason, using it as a training race or a workout, then this can be also a really interesting way to measure success versus total time. So for example, you know, I'll have people do half marathons in advance of their marathons, and sometimes we'll make the decision to not run it all out for whatever reason. And then they'll want to know, well, what should I do? And I say, well, this is a perfect time to practice execution. And so maybe we give them a plan, what I would call a graduated progression or a progression that comes in chunks where they start at marathon pace plus 20 seconds and work to marathon pace over the first few miles, and then they hold marathon pace for five miles, and then they cut down from there to half marathon pace for three or four miles. And then once they get to a certain point in the race, late in the race, then they progress from there by 10 seconds a mile to try to finish their last mile as the fastest mile. But some sort of structured progression, often coming in chunks, that allows them to execute a pace strategy in their fitness without burning all of their candles out so they can save something for their A race later while also learning precision in execution so that when they do get to race day and they have to execute a certain way, they can do it with more success. So how precise were you in execution? Did you follow your plan or not? That's another way to measure success. All right, that was number nine. Number ten, last of all, is and perhaps most important of all, and I think we talk about this one a lot and maybe we give it lip service, but I'm not sure if we fully embrace it in the context, or at least we don't embrace it relative to the way we embrace time. But did you give your all? Did you give max effort? Did you leave everything on the course? And I have a whole podcast actually on this idea, because I think we also don't necessarily view this idea of max effort or giving your all in the right way. And so go back and listen to episode 295, if you want my treatise on what this means. But to me, this is maybe the most important definition of success. Did you give everything you had? Did you leave it all on the course? When you look yourself in the mirror afterwards, can you say, all right, I gave everything I had? And if you can do that, regardless of the time on the clock, then you can absolutely claim success. And the nuance that I talk about in 295 is that that doesn't necessarily look like every single moment of the race is perfection. It doesn't look like that because people will come to me and they'll say, well, there was this one moment where I was doubting myself and I pulled back a little bit and then I got back on it. Well, those things can happen and still give you all. And you still be able to claim giving you all, because those things are a part of racing and a part of being human. And giving you all looks like facing down those challenges and mental doubts in a race. And yeah, maybe pulling back a little bit in the midst of that momentary doubt, but then overcoming it and coming back to get back on it. That's what giving you all looks like. Overcoming those exact challenges is what giving you all looks like. And so it's much more nuanced than I think some of the movie screen definitions of what giving you all looks like. But that doesn't change the importance of this in the context of measuring yourself. Because this truly is all we can ask. All we can ask of ourselves is to give everything we have to take the day, to take what our body, to take what our mind gives us on a given day. Face it down, do our best, and give everything to that finish line. If you can do that, then you have the ultimate version of success. And if you can do that enough, then what often follows, just like that skateboarder who might fall down 99 times before nailing that one trick, if you do that enough, then you're also going to often be blessed with the other forms of success, both in this list and with the PRs and the personal best that you want. So keep striving in that way. And open up and expand your definitions of success in order to claim more victory, and I think ultimately give you the opportunity to do even more with your racing career, because you won't be afraid to fail, and with failure comes lessons for the future. You'll also open up your mind to perhaps doing things that you wouldn't normally do, such as racing races that are hilly or more challenging, that may not be PR level races, but that are going to teach you something through these other definitions of success that will make you stronger as a racer. When you do get that opportunity to go blow the doors off on a flat course with good weather. So hopefully this conversation expands your mind and gives you the inspiration to open up how you view success and therefore open up the opportunities you take to get better in this sport and therefore enjoy it all just a little bit more. So that's my soapbox for the day. Thank you for listening and I'm inspired by all of you who give you all and all the ways to open up these definitions of success. So thanks for listening. As always, you can check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Facebook or Instagram at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.