Hey everybody, this is episode 138 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is Chris coming at you from Austin, Texas. I'm about to actually take off on vacation for a couple of weeks. I will still have episodes scheduled to post for you the next couple of Sundays, but I will be out of town, so keeping this pretty short on the intro, and then I'll be back in full effect from July 21st on. So thanks for allowing me to take a little break, but as I said, you'll have content coming your way the next couple of weeks in spite of that. In this episode, I'm actually bringing on a new Rogue coach. His name is Ryan Posonby. He goes by Poncho, and he's actually a really, really experienced coach in the world of track and field, and has now taken over our team Rogue Dawn Patrol group here in Austin, Texas at our central location that meets on Tuesday, Thursdays, and Saturdays for those that are looking for a more committed and higher mileage training environment. Team Rogue would be the one for you. Ryan is now coaching that group for us. He also coaches at St. Edwards University, the Hilltoppers, where he coaches track and field and cross country, but Ryan's background is a fascinating one. He went to the University of Texas where he ran as a miler and then went on to be a graduate assistant with Jason Vigilante, who was the head coach at UT for a long time of the men and then went on from there to actually coach at the professional level alongside the great coach John Cook, who is now retired and who was Shalane Flanagan's former coach. Ryan also was the primary coach of Leo Manzano when he won his silver at the Olympics in 2012. So Ryan has coached at the highest levels and at all levels. And he gives us a little background on what he's learned through the years from various other coaches, what key tenets make up his coaching philosophy. And he also gives us a behind the scenes story on how Leo won that silver in 2012. So this is a fun and exciting interview and will allow, especially those in Austin, to get to know Ryan a little bit better if you might be interested in coming to train with us in that Team Rogue group. Otherwise, I think you'll just be fascinated to learn about a different perspective on training from Ryan. So with that as a quick intro, let's welcome Ryan to the show. Welcome Ryan Posonby to the show. How are you doing today, sir?

I'm doing well, doing well.

It is a wet day in Austin, but we are dry inside here in this wood podcast studio.

Always a good thing.

Yeah.

A lot of electronics around, you know?

So thanks for joining me. As I mentioned in the intro, Ryan is our new Team Rogue Dawn Patrol coach. You coach our morning Team Rogue group that meets Tuesday, Thursday, downtown here. So it's good to have you on for the world to get to know you a little bit. Although there will be some that already know you from your background and history in the sport. But I want to go back to the beginning for you with running. How did you get into it and when did that start?

Oh man. My first memory of running was fifth grade and I competed in a 5K in Munster, Texas, the German Fest Fun Run. And my best friend at the time had run it the previous year and he knew that the last 200 meters were right after a 90 degree turn. So we ran together for all but the last 200 meters of that 5K and then he just sprinted and kicked and beat me.

He smoked you at the end.

So the next year I remembered that and I beat him. And then that summer I signed up for Summer Track and every year thereafter I was running cross country track, you name it.

What drew you to it? Was it just that competitive fire that your friend sparked by snaking you on that final 200?

You know, I competed in almost every sport growing up and I didn't know it then but I really believe that what drew me was that I was good at it and I liked winning, I hated to lose. And that alone, just kind of playing to my strength, I think was enough to lure me. I mean, I liked the feeling of being very good at something.

Yeah, what other sports were you playing?

Baseball, basketball, soccer, those were the three primary.

Was running your best or did you have aptitude at others?

No, I was good. I mean, I played, you know, club level soccer. You know, I was a good athlete. I am a good athlete, but I think I definitely was better at running comparatively, but I was good.

And when did you, or did you ever focus as you progressed in high school? Did you actually focus on one thing or two things or keep doing everything?

No, yeah, exactly. In high school, my freshman year in high school, I remember my track coach at the time in the spring. I was trying to do both. I was trying to play soccer. I'd come off cross country. I actually broke my hip in cross country. I took a weird fall and had a fracture, hairline fracture in my femoral head. And so I had to take some time off. All that time, I was supposed to be in soccer. So I was having conversations with the JV soccer coach about when I could return. And it was kind of a, you know, when you're released by your doctor, you can come out. Well, my track coach kind of knew, I mean, I won district in cross as a freshman and my track coach came out and said, hey, you know, you really ought to consider your future in this sport. And unless your parents want to pay for college, I think you should focus on running. And at that time as a freshman in high school, 13, whatever, 13, 14 year old, I remember having that realization, man, this is something I'm good at. I can win at it. And I could potentially go to college and get a scholarship. So best of all worlds.

So there you go. Focused from freshman year on?

Yeah.

And how did that go in high school? I don't even know your background.

I mean, there was nothing like significant about it. I mean, going into my senior year, I qualified for the state championships here in Texas. I was 4A classification. Back then, it was 5A was the biggest classification. So I was 4A. And I ran 153 as a junior, qualified for state, and I also qualified as a member of our four by four team. So made it to state. Obviously, it's held at the University of Texas every year. And I fell in love with it my junior year. My senior year, I was ranked number one all year in the state, but didn't medal. Boneheaded tactical error my senior year. But at that time, I'd already signed with the University of Texas. And that's where I was going to go.

So you ran the 400 and the 800 and then cross?

Yeah. So I had a different cross country coach my first year. And then my track coach became my cross country coach. But we never focused on distance. So I kind of met him. I was running the two mile mile my freshman year. And I kind of met him in the middle with the 800. And then I had to jump on the four by four.

Wow.

As soon as I got to college, my mileage jumped up. And I became more of a miler.

So and you were recruited to UT. Was it Vig at the time?

Yeah.

Jason Vigilante, who was coaching there at the time. So what was that process like?

The recruitment process? Yeah, it was late my senior year. I'd gone to a competition, I think, in Richardson in early March and ran a PR. But I think I ran 152. But I took Jonathan Johnson to the line, to the wire, who was a 148 high school half-miler. And I took him to the line and the next week I had an offer. And I think...

Because Johnson went on to Tech, is that right?

He went on to Tech. He was an Olympic Trials winner in 2004. He was an NCAA champion there at Tech, so he was pretty good. He could split 45 on the 4x4 and he was a 145. He may have gone 144. I'm probably mixing up his PRs. But he was really good. But yeah, I really, I tell you that, you know, Vig was somebody who really appealed to me. And he really did a good job in understanding that I was running the 4x4 and 8, but he saw something there that I could move up in distance.

Something more.

Yeah.

What did you learn from him through the years at UT?

That we can overcomplicate this thing, really, truthfully. It's a pretty simple sport. It's a pretty simple endeavor. It's putting one foot in front of the other. You know, there were times when, just like any athlete, you get caught up in workouts and splits and not hitting the times and marks. He was really good at the psychological aspect. And, you know, just keeping us as a team, he held us accountable. But we were never the group that was totally focused on training in a bad way, where it's over the top. We trained hard, but if it didn't go our way, that was okay. We weren't big on keeping, you know, and it was a lot easier then because we didn't have GPS watches, but we didn't keep track of every mile that we ran. We didn't break it down in splits and get too focused on pace. It was more about effort. We did a lot of runs on time. And when it was time to work out, it was time to work out. And when it was time to race, it was time to race. And those were very different times than just your typical training run. So the other thing that I've really learned from him was the power of the team and team dynamic and for us, every year indoors, we were going to have a competitive distance medley relay. And that built a lot of confidence in us early on. And it went from the point of, you know, having a distance medley relay that could compete at the NCAAs to one that could win and ultimately set a world record, right? So I think the team dynamic, it was really important for us to be team guys.

How did he foster that?

You know, I think there was a lot. He encouraged us to do everything together, to live together, to eat together, to run together. He really wanted us to become a brotherhood. And we, you know, I've got still a text message chain of 20 plus guys. And it's a constant conversation. He also recruited very similar minded people, driven people, people who hated to lose. So, there were a lot of similarities, I think, in our DNA. And that was over the course of eight years he was there.

How did college running go for you?

It was good. I don't think I ever, you know, most athletes will probably tell you this, but I don't think I ever accomplished all the things I wanted to. I always wanted to be a sub-four-minute miler. I wanted to be an NCAA champion. I never accomplished either of those. I ran 3.42 for a 15. I ran fourth flat for a mile. And I never made it to an NCAA final. I certainly think I had the potential to, but just never got it done.

What do you think held you back?

That's a good question. I don't know. You know, I think sometimes overthinking it, right? And it's easy to overthink a race. And I think a lot of times we get into a race and we have a race plan. And that works less than half of the time, I think. I think you've got to be able to adapt to the situation. And those who can really react, who can react to whatever happens in a race, the pace, the tactics, and just be there present in the moment and not so focused on what they thought was going to happen going into the race, I think those are the ones who succeed. Especially at the championship level.

When you're racing.

When you're racing.

So at some point in college, I think based on our prior conversations, that thought of being a coach that was seeded in your mind, when did that start?

You know, I don't know when it started. I felt like I always wanted to coach. I always had good relationships with all of my coaches growing up. My dad was my soccer coach growing up. He wasn't a coach by trade, but he was always such a positive influence on so many of my friends growing up. And I saw that and I thought that was something, you know, he had, I had friends who were on our soccer team, who on Father's Day would come and deliver my dad a Father's Day gift. Right. Sometimes they wouldn't even give their own dad a gift. So I always saw that and thought, wow, you know, I think it's the idea of working with people, right, and helping them to accomplish what they couldn't do potentially without your help, right, without your guidance. I think that's really what is has kind of made me click over the years. Initially, though, when I, when I wanted to coach, I wanted to work with the best of the best. I thought that was like, that was the sexiness of it for me. It was, you know, working with Olympians, working with American record holders. I thought that was the pinnacle. And that's what I went for initially in coaching.

So tell me about the evolution then of your coaching journey.

Yeah, you know, I never thought it would happen as soon as it did. It kind of got expedited. I actually initially thought, OK, I'm going to coach Power 5 Division 1 program and go that route. And I pursued that. I volunteered after taking a year away from, I should say, it's not really a year away from the sport. I co-founded Flow Track and I wasn't an athlete or a coach for about a year, right? We were starting a business outside of it. And when I came back, I got inspired in that one year. I was interviewing a lot of people, kind of like this situation we're in now. But I was jealous of the person on the other side of the microphone. And I wanted to coach. And I knew at that time it was the right time for me to start. So I came back to Texas, asked Vidge if I could be a volunteer. And he said, absolutely. So I coached for two years as a volunteer. And unfortunately, in Division I, that's just kind of how it goes. You have to put in your time, so to speak. Whether it's a graduate assistant or a volunteer assistant, you've basically got to go this very low-paid or no-paid route to start out, pay your dues and learn the ropes. So I did that. And after two years, I had some opportunities that were there. They weren't strong. They weren't ones that I thought... I just wasn't really, really excited about them. And that was 2008. And it just so happened that one of my former teammates went pro with Nike and Leo Manzano, and it just competed at the Olympics, OK? So at that time, too, Vige left for Virginia. So Leo was in this situation in Austin, Texas, where he still had a semester of school left. I knew him very well. I competed with him and sometimes against him in races and trained with him for the previous four years. Excuse me, for four years and then had coached him for a year and a half with Vige. And he asked me just basically because I was there and, you know, let's not change up too much. He'd just, you know, come off of a pretty good season if I'd work with him. And I said I would, but it would be on a temporary basis because I was trying to get a college job. And then one thing led to another, and he and I are down in Mexico with John Cook and his Nike group with Shalane Flanagan, Shannon Rowbury and Aaron Donahue. They had all just come off of Beijing as well. And Shalane obviously had just come off of her bronze medal, which has now been upgraded to a silver, I believe. But, yeah, all of a sudden I'm there with Cook, and we're just kind of figuring it out. And it grew from there over the next four years.

So you became, in a sense, Leo's primary coach.

Yes.

And we're working at the time with Cook as well and his group.

Right.

Tell us about John Cook. I think he's now retired from coaching from what I understand, but was a legend in his time, certainly.

In more ways than one.

He had one of the strong Nike group, had one of the strong Nike groups before he hung up his whistle. So what did you, talk about his personality and what you learned from him.

Cook was, you know, he's a pretty funny guy, actually. He's originally from Germany and, you know, very much a German in the stereotypical way, very disciplined, very regiment time, you know, form, mechanics, everything was very structured in his training paradigm. He was also, I think, unconventional in many ways, especially when he started getting things rocking and rolling at George Mason in the 80s and 90s. And, you know, he was doing general strength, med ball, hurdle mobility, all of that much earlier than it had really caught on. I think he was, to be honest, a pioneer of adapting like the Lauren Seagrave, Dan Path, Vern Gambetta, all of that, all of those principles to middle distance, distance runners, long before maybe anybody else or most anybody else in middle distance, distance running. So I think in that way, he certainly flipped it on its head in terms of all of the ancillary work, all of the post-workout work, all of the pre-workout work. It wasn't just running. And that to me was the biggest eye-opener. I saw, you know, where we went down to Mexico and Shalane Flanagan, who just come off of her 10K medal was doing a 40 minute, 35 to 40 minute circuit workout on the track. And I'll tell you, like very little running was involved. It was just constant exercises and drills. And she was very, very strong from just a, you know, just able to maintain form and she's pretty ripped. So that kind of blew my mind. And then I think with Cook too, he was a character. You know, he wasn't afraid to talk, to speak his mind. And he did that often. I was attached on many email chains that I still don't know how I was attached to them, but it was yelling at somebody or somebody's done something wrong or who knows. But I think what I took from that was passion. There really was a deep burning passion and desire to win there. And I think his athletes felt that as well.

It's pretty common in sprint workouts to have the athlete spend as much or more time on drills and perhaps some dynamic strength work than they do running. That's much less common in the distance world, but from what I understand of those workouts with Shalane and company back in the day, that would often happen where they were spending more time pre and post workout on form drills, dynamic strength, mobility work, than they were actually on running the workout. So, describe to me what that would look like.

You know, it's funny, I think you're right on. And as a matter of fact, I was talking to Howie Kafleski recently, and he told me-

Meb's agent and brother.

Yes, yeah, Meb Kafleski's agent and brother. And he told me, he's like, you know, you guys spend more time middle distance athletes, especially you with Leo, you guys spend more time during a workout than Meb spends on his workout. He's like, you've got to allocate like four hours to a workout. Meb's workouts don't last that long. I got a kick out of that. But yeah, I think, you know, there was... The more I learned about Cook's philosophy, there were layers to it. It was like peeling back, you know, a medical book. Somebody made this analogy one time and I thought it was spot on. You know that the Netter medical books where it starts with the skin layer and then it goes to muscular and then it goes to nervous and then skeletal. There were layers to his training and you start to peel back and you think you got it figured out and then you peel back another layer and you're like, oh man, there's more to this. And so it depended on the period. But let's say when we would go down to Mexico, that would be, you know, the height of the... That was where frequency, intensity and volume were all at its highest and were at altitude. And I think we went to Mexico because it was 80 degrees and sunny, but we were also kind of isolated. None of us, except for Leo, spoke Spanish. So we were isolated in the sense that we were in the mountains, but we also couldn't really speak. So all you did there was train and you focused on training and you could do it pretty successfully with minimal interruption. And a typical day would be AM session, we'd maybe go out to a run, kind of travel away from our base camp, 40 minutes, go for a longish run, maybe up to 70, 80 minutes. And then we could come back in the afternoon and go through drills, go through exercises, go through a circuit. So the morning run may be kind of more typical. We may follow up with some general strength routines, just body functional, body weight. We may take the medicine balls with us and do a routine as well. And then in the afternoon, it would be very specific, maybe a light warm up, 15 to 20 minutes, followed with sprint drills, hurdle mobility, various general strength routines, maybe a mini circuit. And then a few days a week, two or three days a week, we'd finish up with a weight routine, an ancillary lift session. So that was fairly typical for down there. And then some afternoons, we'd mix in maybe some short hill sprints, 40, 50, 60 meters, just to get leg turnover. So it'd be a way to come back from the morning's workout and get some leg turnover and kind of flush the legs in maybe a different way than we're used to.

So what is he trying to accomplish? I mean, I understand in the general what he's trying to accomplish with all of that extra work. But in this specific, what's he trying to accomplish?

You know, I often, I took a notebook down there with me. And I wrote down at the end of every day, I'd pick his brain and I wrote down everything that he said. And he said, with the form drills, for example, we're just trying to work on fraction of a percentage of improvement in form, in developing tensile strength, right, and getting good form. And I think at the end of a race, he'd make this analogy, you're going to break down. But if we can minimize how much we break down by, then we're obviously going to use our primary muscle groups, right, we're going to utilize good form for that individual by focusing on over-exaggerating that in those drills and exercise routines, and ultimately just get strong, right, I mean, it's pretty simple.

So sustaining form under fatigue, basically.

Yes, yes, now we wouldn't sprint long fatigue, that was different, but we'd do lots of exercises while fatigued.

And would this kind of work come season long, or would it be primarily geared towards the early part of the season?

It'd be, it's actually, it'd be if we could break up the season in maybe five, right, five periods. It would be between three and, somewhere around three, and period three and period four, let's say.

If five is the last period?

Yeah, or excuse me, two and three, excuse me, two and three.

So early, so one, two, three.

Yeah, the first portion of the season, there wouldn't be a lot of intensity in that regard.

So more of a true base period.

Yeah.

Yeah, and then how would it progress?

Mileage-wise, you know, for middle distance athletes at that time that we were working with. We'd start maybe 30, 40 miles a week. And by the time we're in February, we're up to 75, 70 to 80 miles a week. But that would be about the max, would be 80, especially at that time, because we're also introducing more track-specific sessions. And in the professional world, we've got indoor season, but I can tell you that was never a focus. I mean, we raced, but that was never a focus for us. So we kind of, we basically raced through indoors, except for the last two weeks of the season. Yeah. And then we'd pick right back up in March.

And was that different for somebody like Shalane, who was working more 10K?

You know, I think that was, with Shalane, I believe the year before, two years before, I'm getting my years mixed up, but she was injured. And that's when Cook first started working with her, I think in 2006-ish, something like that, maybe 2007. So he was just trying to get mileage under her belt and keep her healthy. So he wanted to get her as strong as possible, but she's an aerobic beast, right? So really just getting her to the starting line healthy was kind of the goal. At least that's what he told me. And then in 2007, saw more improvement, more mileage under her belt. And in 2008 is when she first took on the 10K and you saw how that went. So at that time, I believe her mileage was somewhere in that ballpark, 70 to 80 miles. 70 to 80. Yeah, but she was cross training a lot. She was doing a lot of swimming at that time as well.

So what did you learn from her as an athlete in the time that you got to work with her?

Yeah, and it was very short. But I think Shalane, first of all, she's a great person. And we were down in Mexico for just a little bit. I couldn't tell you how long we were there for. I know total I was there for two months, but I can't remember how long she was there for. She was very driven, though. Very driven. She was a very committed person. And I think one thing that has really benefited her in her current situation with Jerry Schumacher is I think she has complete trust in her coats, and she'll run through walls for him. She is obviously a physical specimen, but man, is she ever committed to achieving a goal.

Now part of her shift to Schumacher, at least as I remember it, was the idea that she needed to get more volume to do what she wanted to do as she eventually moved up to the marathon. What do you think about that?

I think it certainly worked for her. I don't know what she's been doing specifically in training, but I think it's worked for her. And I think, you know, again, that belief in her coach I think is, obviously you've got to put in the training, but I think her believing in him, like she does, from what I can tell, has probably equally benefited her. But, you know, making the jump to the marathon, you do need to put in the mileage.

More miles. But Cook seemed to be a little bit, or he didn't seem to be so enamored by a certain number of miles. Obviously 70, 80 is a lot, but you have a lead soon, 100 plus, regardless of what distance they're running. So, talk about that trade-off in his mind and your philosophy.

I'd say what I learned was there's more days in the week where you can implement quality sessions, and they may only have, you know, we used to talk about half workouts a lot. And we used to implement a lot of half workouts. And we'd play around with a lot of pace change throughout the week. So, you know, typical, let's say a typical seven week cycle, excuse me, seven day cycle is two workouts and maybe a long run. He may sneak in one or two half workouts additional. So, he's getting three workouts in a week. So, volume doesn't necessarily need to be there if the quality is there, right? So, we talk about the three, I guess, principles, right? That make up any type of training paradigm, right? It's intensity, volume and frequency. The intensity wouldn't be enough to where you'd have to pass the negative forward from Tuesday session to Wednesday. So, you could go back to back, but you weren't, the volume wasn't so much that it constituted as a full workout. So, we could sneak in back to back days. Whereas, if you kind of structured it in a very conventional training, I guess training setup or training scenario, you've got a quality session on Tuesday and another on Friday, right? Or one on Tuesday and one on Thursday. He would go maybe Monday, do a half session, Tuesday come back, take off a day and a half, come back that afternoon with something. Maybe an up tempo 30 minute run, right? But nothing that, you know, we did a lot with heart rate as well. So, staying within a certain heart rate range on those days. A lot of workouts that were fart lick based, a lot of out and backs. So, they weren't quantified in terms of, hey, you're going to do a four mile tempo at this. It was, we're going to do an out and back. So, we're going to go out in 15 minutes and come back in 13 and a half minutes, right? And staying within this heart rate range. So, there was a lot of that. There was also just repetition, repetition, repetition. But slower, right? So, when we really, really, really got into the, to let's say phase four, like I was saying, phase five was basically just racing at that point. That's a championship. But phase four, we'd do a lot of repetitions on the track, but they'd be with a little bit more rest than I was ever used to. You know, maybe let's say, let's use, for example, like 12 quarters, right, or 10 quarters. Instead of an equal rest throughout, he'd give a little bit more rest, but every few, let's say, and it was sporadic, too. He wouldn't tell you, but every so often, he'd want you to go at race pace for the 1500, right, or faster, and he wouldn't tell you where, and it was honestly, I think it was a little bit spontaneous, and it was getting you comfortable with being uncomfortable, but you'd get more rest. You'd maybe get up to four or five minutes rest after that fast quarter, and then you get right back into the groove of your typical quarter sessions, right, somewhere around 60, 64 for elite 1500-meter guys.

At what point, and Leo was in that group, at what point did you guys split off from Cook's group?

Well, I think, you know, we, I guess 2012, but after 2011, Leo had a, he didn't have a great year, and he had an injury at the end, and he'd tell you he didn't have a great year. He still made it to the World Championships. I honestly don't remember if he even made the semifinal. I can't remember. I know he didn't make the final. But he had a hamstring injury. But, you know, the year as a whole just wasn't great. There were highlights, there were glimpses of it. I mean, he won the Emslicar mile. He won Crystal Palace in 2011, beat Ligat. And I think he ran 351 there for the mile. And then, you know, obviously qualified for Worlds. But outside of those very few highlights, it really wasn't that great of a year. And we sat down and talked. And I basically told him he needed to get away and analyze things because, you know, in 2009, he made the final in Berlin and finished dead last, but he made the final. And he looked like a million bucks in the prelims. And I remember thinking, I thought, truly he underachieved. I thought he could have done better. And we had this conversation afterwards, just based on his workouts and just where he was at physically. You never know when you're going to have another opportunity in a global championship final. And I don't think, I really think you blew that opportunity in the final. And he, you know, we had our words. And anyways, he came back the very next, well, the world athletics final in Thessaloniki, Greece, and he finished second, and he ran a PR. I believe he ran 333 there, a season PR, which I knew was in him, or excuse me, a PR, a season best. And that was his last race, basically, until the New York Roadrunner's Fifth Avenue mile. But last track race. And so there you go. His fitness was there. He walked the same guys down that were in that world championship final, right, just like he always does and is able to do. And I remember having that conversation with him, and then 2011, I kind of brought that up. I was like, that was the last time you were in a final. And granted, there wasn't one in 2010, but still, you never know when you're going to get those opportunities, and you better capitalize on them. Because anything can happen when you're in the final. And if you're not there present in the moment, if you think I've made it just because I'm in the final, you've already lost, right? If you step into that call room 45 minutes before the race goes off and you don't have your mind absolutely made up on what you're going to do, you're lost. Those guys are going to eat your lunch every single time. And it's a lonely place in there, by the way, if you don't know what you're going to do. 45 minutes, 12 guys just staring at each other.

The best in the world, too, right?

Yeah, absolutely. And I guarantee you there's three of them who know exactly what they're going to do. You better be one of those three. So, you know, he went away, he went on vacation, and he came back, and he was completely changed. And I restructured his training a lot. I felt like we were doing more intensity than he absolutely needed. Because he's a guy who, first of all, he can get in shape very, very quickly. He's also somebody who's naturally got a gift of being able to close, right? So he can maintain a certain pace and close off of that. And that's generally 1500 meter race pace. 800 he just kind of gets in and hangs on, even though that's his favorite race, and he's very, very good at it. So I took a step back, and I had conversations with Cook about it, and I basically said, like, I think I need to do something different with Leo this year. And my whole theme in 2011, you know, fall 2011 and 2012 was just keep it in the fairway. Let's not try and hit these hard, crazy workouts. Let's just keep it in the fairway for Leo, right? Things that are attainable, and it'll compound on itself, I guarantee it, because I just knew it, right? And if we're keeping him in the fairway in terms of we're never really swinging for the fences in a workout, like everything he does, he could walk away knowing that he could do one more repetition harder, or he could come back the next day and feel pretty good. That was kind of the indication. I also reintroduced some very key workouts that I thought really resonated with Leo. If you know Leo, repeat Ks. He loves repeat Ks. Six by K, you just minimize the rest over time, keep it at a pretty comfortable pace. He loves Ks. 300s he likes, 400s, so you kind of reintroduce these every so often. But that was it. We did a lot more threshold type workouts. We got into tempos regularly with him, and nothing that was out of this world. I mean, we were on Town Lake. We got up to five miles on Town Lake, and I just kind of positioned it as a progression. So we'd start with a pack, right? At that time, it was Jacob Hernandez, Kyle Miller, Pablo Salarez, Leo, Jackson Kuvuva, Muhammad Aman was there for a little bit. I think he was here for all of maybe a sip of tea. Like two weeks, and then he went back to Ethiopia. He was the, at that time, he was the only person to beat Rudisha, I think, well, the last person to beat Rudisha. Gosh, when was that? 2011. So he must have beat him right in the end. I think he beat him in Brussels, maybe, in Belgium. And he broke Rudisha's like two-and-a-half-year win streak. And so we had him here in Austin training. So we had a pretty solid guy's middle-distance group. They'd start at 520, and in the last two or three miles, they'd be at five down to 430s on the trail. But finishing up, not really breathing hard, just slapping fives, and that's what I like to see. They could easily run away from that, right? And they were feeling good. They were not on their hands and knees. So we kept it in the ballpark. We, with long runs as well, rarely did we get above 90 minutes for a long run. Usually it was 80, but it was sustained. And, you know, the workouts themselves, there was nothing flashy or sexy about them. We started reintroducing the repeat Ks, repeat miles. I don't know exactly the progression off the top of my head, but I can tell you it was nothing super sophisticated through the fall. It was basically just training consistently, right, within yourself and putting in the time. A lot of hills. Did a lot of hills. I love hills.

I'm learning that.

We got up to where we were doing repeat 800-meter hills, but again, not fast, right? And I didn't like the run down, so I had them jump in the back of the truck, and I'd drive them down, because I didn't like the downward drive. I think it does a lot, especially when you're talking about repeat 800-meter hills for 1, 500, 800 guys, right? It's just a lot of volume, and keeping their legs... I think we minimize the occurrence of soft tissue injury that way, basically. And I could control the rest, too. So if I wanted it two minutes, I'd just fly down the hill with a group of guys in the back, the truck. And so, you know, we got to the point where I thought it was important to get to altitude with a solid level of fitness under our belts, because I think it takes fitness, a very strong baseline fitness, in order to really gain fitness at altitude when you're going in and out like we were. So we got there, and one of the second week, Leo and David Torrance were doing repeat Ks at altitude, minimal rest. I think we were doing maybe 70, 70 to 60 seconds rest. We started off at 255 and worked down, and they did eight by a K, and their last one, the two of them were just banging it out, and they finished in 231, but again, within themselves. They were both very strong. We hadn't done anything faster and aerobic at that point. And I just remember thinking that's a different Leo than a year ago, two years ago, three years ago. He would never have been able to do that workout. And these small successes in training started to build, right? And the confidence started to build. And then came out of Mexico, went to Arkansas. Back then, they still had the Tyson Invitational. And I think he finished sixth or seventh, but he still ran 356, I think, for a mile, which was the, I believe it was the best at that point he'd ever run professionally indoors in a mile. So that was good. You know, it was the first race of the indoor season. And then, you know, I don't know that he raced again until indoor USAs. And that was all because of confidence. We had a flight get canceled. I think we were going to go up to Boston. Didn't need another race. Already had the qualification. And I remember talking to him, because I had a whole group here, and he was the only one, no, it was him and Shannon. And they're the only ones going to compete indoors. And I remember telling him, I'll go if you really need me to, but I got a whole group here. And he's like, no, man, I got it. Don't worry.

I was like, really?

And he goes, yeah, man, I got it. And all of those successes in training, all of that confidence has built. And he went in there like a man on a mission, just going to work, and won it, and came away USA indoor champion for the first time ever, right? Beating Centro, I think Galen actually ran the mile that year, Galen Rupp. Who else was in there? You know, a lot of good talent. And I do believe that was a world championship year, and we decided not to go. We wanted to focus on the outdoor progression, the Olympic trials. And so I think either Galen or Centro got to go because Leo gave up his spot. So anyways, that was it for indoors. But one race was a personal best ever indoors, well, yeah, ever. And the other one was a victory. And that always feels good, right? And every time truly a competitor just wins, that breeds confidence. So that's enough for indoor. Let's get ready for outdoor.

Before we talk about the final build to London where obviously he won a silver medal, I want to talk about two things in that that you mentioned. One is staying in the fairway. And I think a lot of times people feel like they have to be training at the edge or near the line in order to get something out of it. Unless they're dragging ass on every run or every workout, they're not doing work. Right. So let's talk about that. And then secondarily, why Hills? So let's start with the fairway question first.

So I mentioned my freshman year. I went from running maybe 15 miles a week in high school to running 70 plus miles a week. And I was sick and tired a lot. And I couldn't stay awake through a movie ever. And my friends all laugh at me now. You know, teammates. We went to watch Black Hawk Down in theater, and I fell asleep in the first five minutes. That's not a movie you fall asleep in. Something's wrong there. I never felt good in a race. I was always tired. And I thought it was just the adjustment to college. But I think there was a little bit of overtraining happening. And the next year, I scaled back to something that was much more manageable. And I took one day off where I just cross-trained. I biked for 30 minutes to an hour on Thursdays. And I saw personally the effects of... And I don't want anybody to take this the wrong way. You should always train hard, right? This is not easy to do. Any goal you have of accomplishing something you've never done before, it's not going to be easy to do, and you're going to have to train your ass off. But there's a difference between training intelligently and just going out and training hard every day, right? At some point, there's diminished return. And I saw that not only in myself as a young athlete, but I saw where working with Cook, I saw that we could train hard, but we could also race really, really well off of training hard. And it wasn't over training. So we never crossed that line, I don't think. We never had, rarely did we have any injuries, any soft tissue injuries, overuse type injuries. Rarely did we have major illness, where your body is just trying to fight something because it's training so hard, it just can't combat. The immune system shot. So I learned that there's this happy medium where you can train at a high level, but it's never something that is too much to where you can't come back the next day. Now I will say I scaled back a little bit in 2012 with Leo, and I'll get into that later. But I just thought with his situation, we weren't thinking about PRing. We weren't thinking about running a personal best or going somewhere and running one fast time. He needed to be strong for the rounds. And again, if we just kept it in the fairway and let him do him in the racing, he'd be fine, right? Get him confident, get him healthy, get him fit, get him to the starting line.

Because he can close like nobody else.

He can close, right? So play to his natural ability. Let him be him. You just get out of the way sometimes as a coach. And I think we all need a reminder of that.

So since you've taken over Team Rogue and really even before you did, as we were writing the schedule for this spring, we added a bunch of hills.

Yes.

300 meter hill repeat sessions at Scenic Hill here in Austin, where we're doing up to 800 meters back and forth on hills. Why hills? What does it do for you?

So I think there's a lot. I think first and foremost, the hill itself, right? Running up a hill is tough. Repetitions are tough running up a hill. You're going to have to have good form. And rarely do you ever see anybody running up a hill with bad form. It almost forces you to have good form. Now, the hills that I'm describing, that we do, I think we should describe, we're not going up more than 10%, right? Like we're not doing crazy incline. It's all very manageable. And anytime we finish a hill, we get to the crest and are able to open up after the hill. So we get beyond the crest of the hill, and it's either a slight downhill or it's flat at the top, right? And that's by design. You don't want to finish a hill repeat with a shortened stride rate, right? Like, you want to be able to open up and sprint off of it. I think there's a lot of physiological effects as well, something I learned from Cook. It's no better way to develop stroke volume. I think it's also a little bit of sprint work in disguise, so it's a nice way to introduce that type of work while keeping it kind of hidden. So you're getting in potentially VO2 max type work or even faster if it's shorter, while keeping it continuous and keeping it hidden. You know, sometimes, too, it's not as finite as the track, so it's a nice way to get away from it while still doing very similar work or at least a precursor to the type of work that you're going to get later. But I think it also, it really just makes it tough getting up the hill. I think there's no two ways about it, right? I mean, running up a hill is hard. And you've got to drive up it. You've got to power up it. And I think a lot of times it's underutilized. It's safe, I think, also in terms of the angulation of your foot strike. I think it's very safe to do, and it's utilizing primary muscle groups, you know?

So Leo wins indoor in 2012. Then you're building to London that summer where he gets the silver. How did you put the finishing touches on that season that ultimately led to the big medal?

We never got ahead of ourselves, right? We never got carried away with fast times. And I think a lot of times you see in Olympic years especially, people are trying to do too much. And I think the emphasis a lot of times is on fast times and not on proper buildup and on racing. Truly developing one's racing tactics and where their strengths lie. You know, a lot of times too in the professional world, you're in races where it's paced, right? Well, how does that really teach you how to win a championship, right? How does that teach you race tactics that work for you when you're in a paced race? It's going to go out in 254, you know, and you guys are closed, right? Like, well, how does that... If we know exactly what's going to happen, how is that... It's great for fast times, it's great for, you know, getting good marks, but how does that develop us tactically, right? So, indoors, championship style racing. Outdoors, he ran pen relays, he anchored, but it was very tactical. And the racing outside of that, right? Like, we knew and we talked about this a lot in training. We did a lot of, with that middle distance group that we had, we did a lot of race simulation with the intervals. Like, somebody was to close at this point in this 400 meter rep. Somebody was to close while we're doing repeat 150. Somebody's going to go at this point. Nobody else knows, they're all supposed to respond. We did that a lot, actually, in the final several weeks there, leading up to the trials. But I'll tell you, up until, and everything was going smooth, and he won the trials and went over to Europe and did a little tune up 800 in, I believe it was Reims? Reims? Reims? France? I don't know, I'm probably butchering that.

Brahms, I think, because the US just played there today.

Oh, really?

Yeah. Reims.

Yeah, that's it.

Yes. I think they're saying Brahms whenever I'm hearing it on TV.

Gotcha. Yeah, I don't know. Well, the point, actually the point of the story is I didn't go. I was here and I had to move my apartment. I was getting, I guess our lease was up, or they were selling the condo or something. So I had to stay back and move. And I was like, you know, I just told him I'd meet you over there. We'd meet in London. And he called me after the race. He's like, yeah, it went well. My hamstring feels a little funny, but all good. And I think I was like in the middle of this Texas heat, moving boxes. I wasn't really paying attention, you know, to what he said. And I got there, and man, his hamstring was rocked. He finished, I don't even know if he finished Crystal Palace that year, but he couldn't move his hamstring. So we had to basically take some time off and get it right, seeing every physio we possibly could. And that adjustment was another, for me, a-ha moment in not doing too much leading up to a championship. We're two weeks out, and he can't run 60 seconds for a 400. And here we are going into the biggest race of his life. So we went back to the trail, and we just did repeat time efforts. Or I'd just mark things on the trail with a cone. So it wasn't so finite, but we just wanted effort. We wanted turnover. So we were somewhere, I think we were maybe in Teddington or something. And we were in the park, and we do repeat one minute, two minute, three minute, four minute, three minute, two minute, one minute, something like that on the trail. And we just do, like we were simulating repetitions maybe on the track, but we were just doing it by time on the trail, so it was soft and it was flat. And I marked the little course that we were doing it on. And I saw turnover start to come back, but confidence was everything at that point because he was basically undefeated outdoors in any type of championship racing that I would consider. So confidence was there, so the time off didn't really hurt, right, the downtime. And this was two weeks out from the Olympics, so what the hell are you going to do at that point, right? I mean, you try and do too much, and you're only going to make the situation worse. So I think the only workout that we really did that was somewhat taxing was repeat 800s at 203 down to 201. And we finished up with some 300s at 45 to 43 or something like that. That was it. We never did anything faster up until the games. And there's rounds in the Olympics, right? You got the first round, the second round, and then the final. And Leo was always somebody who really thrived on racing, and he always felt like he could actually progress through the rounds. Like he would almost get fitter through the rounds. And I think in certain ways he would. He'd certainly get race sharp in the rounds. So we talked about that throughout that buildup. Man, you're just going to get better with every round. Every round you're going to get sharper. You're fit enough right now to get you there. It could take 10 days to completely decondition. So let's go give it what for and take one round at a time.

I assume you were in the stadium for the final?

Absolutely.

McCluffy, who won, sort of made the race in the final lap. Leo was in good position but not at the very front going into the final 200. And you sort of were waiting to see if that classic Leo kick was going to be there. And then in the final 100 it was. So how did that race play out as you watched it?

So let me back up. I was in the stadium for the final. But in the warm up area, which I said is 45 minutes out, is last call. So you start your warm up basically an hour and a half out from race time. And we're there and we had always made it a habit of talking race tactics the night before. And we didn't really talk too much the day of. And that was just forever with Leo. We never really talked too much the day of. It was the night before. And then that was kind of it. The night before, we went over the race routine in terms of tactics and where we thought he should be and who maybe had what. But of course, that's like flipping a coin. You never know. But I think it was important, you know, always to kind of have a tentative plan and be able to adjust on the fly. After all, he's the guy out there. He's reading it. He's got to be able to adapt. But it was funny because right before he's never done this. He had never done this before. He's never done it since. Right before the race, excuse me, right before the final call, they're due to go into this call room. And the official's out there waving them in. And he's the last person going in. And his backpack's on and everything. And he walks in there. We like high five and go get him. He comes back two minutes later and he goes, Hey, Ryan, I go, what's up? I'm thinking, oh, man, what is going on? He goes, Hey, what am I supposed to do again? And I go, man, Leo, just be Leo, just be you. And he goes, got it. And so, yeah, so now, you know, going to the race, I'd never, you can ask my wife. I remember telling her this the night before. I told her, I think, and I really believe this, I think Leo can win. I really remember having that conversation. And I never felt so calm as a coach as just really that Olympic buildup. But the night before that final, you know, sometimes you get excited and you have trouble sleeping, or at least I do as a coach, kind of think, what ifs, did we do this, did we do that? I didn't have a single hesitation in what he was capable of doing, accomplishing on that day. And even after he asked that, it was almost as if he knew at that point that it really didn't matter how the race planned out or panned out. He was going to get it done. And when McCloughy took off with 300 to go, I think I clocked him and the official paces or splits are up there and I think they broke it down per 100, every 100 of that 15. I think he threw down like a sub-13 second 100, 300 meters to go. That actually played to our benefit because Leo was back and all the guys between second and third or second, excuse me, second and fourth, the top three, they responded and went with McCloughy, which was to their detriment because it basically took the kick out of him. Whereas Leo's last 300 was just a progression throughout. And I thought when McCloughy went, okay, he's gone. He's not going to get him, but he can still medal. And at that time, even with 300 to go, I thought there's a shot. And then with 150 to go, I was sitting with Dr. King, our team doctor and good friend, in the stands at 150. It was actually around the 130 meter mark to go mark. And I remember seeing him go swing wide and I knew he was going to get second. I just knew it. And I went ballistic. I didn't even see the finish because of the way, like my angle, it wasn't great. I just knew he was going to do it. And he did.

He was in the perfect spot. And as you said, the gloopy had burned the kickoff, those other guys that he had to close down.

Yeah.

One silver. What was that like? What does that feel like as a coach?

You know, I think it was certainly an emotional high that I can't quite verbalize. But I'd say the reason why it was such a high, not just because it was a medal, because in 2009 I worked with Shannon Rowbury and she won bronze in the 1500, in 2000 at the World Championships in Berlin. And that was obviously a high, right? This was different because it was Leo. And I'd known Leo at that point since 2004. We'd been teammates really well since 2004. We'd been teammates. We went from teammates and friends to coach athlete, still friends-ish, right? But it was a professional relationship, but it was deeper than that. It was almost like a brotherhood as well, going back to what Vige had always really ingrained in all of us. And so because it was Leo, and because I knew I had personally put in every ounce of effort for four years to the buildup of that, right? I was gone for seven months out of the year for training and racing, and I was gone for months at a time. So to see all of that realized in that way was beautiful. It really was. It's something that I don't know that I'll ever experience anything quite like that. But at the same time, I don't think it changed me in maybe ways that I thought maybe it would. Again, it was amazing. But it really made me question though in many ways the year after, why am I doing this? Why am I coaching? And it wasn't because of the medal, it was because of the process and the people. And I found that I can have that experience at every level, at any level. It doesn't have to be at the professional level to have that. And the professional scene is pretty hard for a coach. I look around and I see a lot of coaches who are road warriors. And for me, I always wanted to have a family, and I always wanted to have a strong family life. And I just didn't think that was something that I could do while living on the road seven months out of the year. I don't think my wife would appreciate it. I don't think now my son would appreciate it. So it really made me question a lot of things in why I was coaching. And now I'm less about that sexiness that I described earlier with working with the elites and kind of that world, and more about the process, consistency, and balance in my life. I know a lot of coaches don't believe in balance and being able to succeed at the highest level, but I do. I think you need it.

So now you coach at St. Ed's, the Hilltoppers, Cross Country and Track, and then of course here with adult athletes at Rogue. How do you take what you learned coaching the likes of Leo and others at their pro level and translate it?

You know, I think it's something that there's never one way to go about this. I think any distance, any level of athlete, we can get to the end result in more than one way. It's understanding the individual, the event, and ultimately where we're at now. And I think working with the best of the best for multiple years, it could be the same guy, for example, Leo, right? But he was never the same athlete from one year to the next. So like I said, we completely changed things in 2011, 2012. We had to adapt. So that to me is the fun part, is the process, and figuring it out. It's a puzzle, right? That's what coaching is. Because in my mind, it's being objective, figuring out what the process is here, what works best for the athlete, and in order to do that, we've got to have a relationship, right? Coach-athlete relationship. So the X's and O's, sure, applying those where I see fit, but it's really more than that. It comes down to the relationship you have with your athlete and the trust they have in you as a coach, and you're only going to be able to push them as much as that relationship will allow you. So I think it's more applicable probably at the collegiate level to develop that in young people, right? Like you see that sometimes with young incoming freshmen who maybe aren't as confident, maybe aren't as, I don't know, they're a little bit wide-eyed, right? They just don't know, and you can work with them on that, and it builds confidence over time when they truly understand and they know the expectations of the training. But I'd say the overall experience, sure, of just coaching at that level and the things you learn and the conversations you have with other coaches, but I think really, really developing a strong relationship.

So then, what does success look like for you? How do you define success as a coach now?

I think it's doing... You know, I subscribe to the John Wooden theory there. I think it's doing everything you possibly can to set yourself up for success, right, on competition day, so leaving no stone left unturned. It's not about the place or the finish or the time, necessarily, okay? You could have somebody go out and win and underachieve. I don't think that's necessarily success. Flipside, you could have somebody go out there and get 20th and set a PR and do everything they possibly could, right? Based on their training, there's not more they could have done. That, to me, is success, right? They didn't win. They're not on the podium. To me, it applies at every level, right?

Words of wisdom for sure. We're going to wrap it right there. Thank you, Ryan, for joining us here at Rogue on the podcast. It's good to have you now as a peer in our Rogue world here. Thanks for joining me on the show.

Cool. Thank you. Appreciate it.

There you go. Ryan Posonby, everyone. Thanks to Ryan for joining me. Hopefully, through him, you learned some other nuances of the training game, including why those hills are so important. So definitely get your hills in. And of course, thanks to all of you for listening. This has been episode 138 of the Running Rogue podcast. As always, you can check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Instagram, Twitter or Facebook at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.