Hey, everybody, welcome to episode 359 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung, coming to you from Austin, Texas. Excited to be back with you this week, back in Austin post Thanksgiving. I hope you all had great holidays. Today, we are back to a solo episode. I do find the coaching episodes a blast. I enjoyed talking to April and Mason, and we'll have others on coming up. But I am finding that they're inspiring solo episodes, which is great to teach all of you. The fun thing about the coaching episodes is that we go into those conversations. I know a little bit of background from an email, but those are just live conversations that you're listening to, largely unedited. It's fun for me to uncover the things, the challenges, the problems, the advice to give for each person as those conversations unfold, and you get to hear that in real time. I do have a long list of people that have emailed me to come on and do that. I haven't been able to respond to all of those yet, but I have them all saved, and I will get back to you, and I am trying to find a way to squeeze in more of these types of episodes, potentially increase my episode count, because I think this is going to be a fun way to create new content for you guys, and I've gotten a lot of good feedback on the ones that I've done with April and Mason so far. I also had the idea that at some point we'll have to go back and hopefully circle back with some of these athletes to see how things are going. A little progress update down the road, perhaps in six months or a year, to see how they've progressed and what they've learned and where their challenges may still be. So that's another idea that's upcoming, but it gives me this wide open new space of content creation and this platform that I'm really excited about. If you're interested again, you can email me, chris at roguerunning.com. If I haven't responded to you yet, I have gotten your message. I have read it. Please be patient as I sort through getting these scheduled, but it's been great again, so far to do it excited about this new format and approach. And it seems like all of you are interested in me doing more. So I absolutely will. Before we jump into my topic today, where I'm going to be talking about routine, establishing a solid foundational routine for your running. That's my topic for today. Before I talk about that quickly, I want to talk about the Crushing Boston virtual group that will start here next week with coaches Kathy and James. That's starting next week on the 9th. It's going to be open. Registration link is now live on our website, and that's going to be open until December 20th. So if you want to jump into that group, now is the time. You can sign up now. James and Kathy recorded their first podcast for the group this week, and that will be posted in the group forums. You'll be able to get acquainted with the concept and the approach. And the 9th on Monday is the first day. If it takes a little bit for you to slide into the group up to the 20th, that is okay. So we've got a little bit of a window where you can jump in over the next few weeks. But if you miss that point, we'll shut it down on the 20th, and then we'll have our group that's carrying up for Boston. So check that out if you're interested. If you're interested in anything related to our coaching opportunities, including one-to-one coaching or other virtual coaching, reach out to the email coaching at roguerunning.com if you have any questions so that we can get back to you and hopefully point you in the right direction to help you achieve your goals. So with that as our intro, want to jump in on this topic of establishing routine for your running. What does that look like? Not just for the running, but for the things that support your running and why is it so important? A couple of episodes ago, I talked about the idea of seeing the forest for the trees, making sure you understand the big picture. This episode is really coming from the opposite side of that, which is what are the trees you need to be planting in order to build the forest that is your big goal. And so we're going to go into the trees this time and really talk about what are the building blocks of getting your goals. So what does that look like? We're going to divide this conversation into two parts. First we're going to talk about some principles around building your routine and why it's so important. And then we're going to talk about the routine itself. How do you structure it so that you can set yourself up for success? And along the way, I'll be pointing to some other podcasts that I've recorded that will be other reference points if you want to dig in to some of the details on each of these individual treats. What are the components of the routine and how can you maximize it? So let's start with the first half, the principles of why routine is so important. And before I dig in to those specifically, I want to set a little bit of context. When I was first starting in my running journey back in 2000, for the first couple of years, I was doing it really because I was motivated by the competitive side of racing, mostly competing with myself at that point. And that was what was exciting to me. And so I found myself in this cycle of training for a race, doing the race for a period of five to six months of training and then racing, and then having a big break, a big gap over the course of two or three months, and then realizing I need to sign up for another race in order to get motivated to train again. And that was my pattern for several years. And what happened as a result is that I ended up finding myself pretty quickly in a plateau from a training perspective because I wasn't getting that year-round consistency. And so recognizing that and as I started in my coaching education journey that was mostly self-taught, I realized that in order to really get the best out of myself as a runner, I needed to be training year-round, which means that I needed to have a year-round routine that would become the foundation for everything that I did from a running perspective, so that whether I was training for a race or not, I could scale up or down from that foundation in order to get the short-term outcomes that I wanted. And so I started to do that. I recognized that by starting each training cycle with a consistent foundation, because of that year-round routine, I was then able to find breakthroughs again in my own running because of that year-round consistency and that routine that underlied it. That was critical in my journey, and I believe it's critical in every athlete's journey. There's a great quote that I love from the great Eliud Kipchoge. He says, Champions are not made when he wins races. It's the seconds, minutes, hours, weeks, and months when he prepares that matter. And Kipchoge is the greatest marathoner, men's marathoner of all time, because he's been more or less consistent in his work since he was a teenager, and now he's in his 30s. So he's built 20 years plus of year-round consistency, and that's why he's won more marathons than anybody in the history. And so applying that concept to our own training is important. The other corollary here, or corollary conversation here, is in our current fitness culture, I think we often glorify the big efforts. The hard, long, crazy, intense, soreness-producing, vomit-producing workouts, whether they be running workouts or strength workouts, that's what we glorify in our fitness culture here in the US at least. And so often when we strive for things, we strive for that kind of glory. But really, I think if you're pushing yourself, if you're trying to find the really hard stuff to lean into, that really builds strength and resilience, and ultimately smashing goals, helping you smash goals is the day-to-day consistency, the small steps, being able to bang out 2,000 miles a year of consistent work. Maybe none of it that is social media worthy, but is the foundation of aerobic capacity building that then helps you succeed and strive for years to come. Because in running, it's a period of 10 to 15 years at which we can build our aerobic system, as I've talked about in recent episodes. So that's nothing sexy. That's just day-by-day consistency. And I think often we undervalue that, and we overvalue in our fitness culture the magnitude or the glory associated with single big days versus thousands of small days that aren't necessarily anything to post about. So let's dig into it on routine. Four things that kind of set the table for us. Principles to think about relative to building your routine and the importance of it. The first is that I believe building a solid, consistent routine that you can maintain year-round is perhaps the most important key to unlocking true fitness gains and true potential. Because as Kipchoge alluded in his quote there, no one day matters more than the other. It's every day of work that is the foundation for what's to come, for building to be your best self. Often we also focus on even the work within a training block, within a four or five month period. When really, all of it counts, every single run you do throughout the year, the ability to stack together, consistent block after consistent block is all additive. It builds a bigger foundation, so that the next time you start a specific training block, you're starting from a higher place. And all of that comes because you've established a consistent routine that more or less stays the same year round. To build off what I said earlier, no one day matters. No one day matters in the grand scheme. It's the body of work that matters, and the body of work built year after year after even decade. That's what gets you to your max potential. That doesn't mean it has to all be perfect. We'll talk more about that in a second. It just means that for the most part, you're doing your work as consistently as you can. So, remember, parts of this episode may seem boring, but it's everything. It's actually everything to getting what you want and beyond. That's point number one. Building your routine, year-round routine, is the key to unlocking true fitness gains. Number two, your routine is also the basis for building consistency and volume. It's the foundation of the house, if we're using a house analogy. It gives you the footprint, the blueprint. When I think about this for maybe different analogies, there's a few that might come to mind that could resonate with you. One might be for those that are into football. On teams with defense in particular, and even with offense, there are base defenses. There are also base offensive schemes that form the foundation of how a team operates on the field on either side of the ball. And that foundation, that philosophy, so to speak, becomes the basis in which they do everything. They call plays, they run their extensions, extended elements off of it. It becomes the platform by which they create variation to then deal with different variables from the other side, the other team. And a team who isn't very good is a team that doesn't understand how to operate well within the concepts of its base, offense or defense. You have to have that foundation. And if you're talking about football, you're talking about cover two or cover three or four three defenses or three four defenses, there's different language that's used, but it all refers to philosophical foundational elements that give you an identity as a team that allows you then to create variation and to build upon it to address anything that might be thrown your way. That's one sort of analogy here. Another analogy would be to use the sort of home base concept, which is that a routine is your home base. It gives you that place to return to when you're not sure what to do or where you're going next. You know how the rooms are structured. You sleep well in the bed. It is easy to operate everything in the home because it's the thing that you're used to. It gives you that foundation and that comfort and safety that becomes the foundation or the home base from which you build or go out and explore the world. But you can always come back to that home base. So with your routine, it's the same way. Your training looks more or less the same year round with variations based on what you might specifically be doing, whether that be tapering or recovering from a race or building back into a race-specific cycle or whatever race-specific cycle you might be doing. It's all going to be variations off of that home base, off of that foundation. And so if you understand what that looks like for you, then it becomes pretty easy to shift into a specific type of training, to get into a recovery and maintenance mode, to establish a base foundation from which you can build, to make adjustments when life changes or schedule changes. It's the foundation from which you build everything. And if you don't have it figured out, then that will breed inconsistency, because you won't know what to return to when it's time to rebuild after a race. You won't know how to set up the foundation of a specific training cycle because you don't have the basic elements covered. So that's point two in all of this, is that it is a critical foundation. It becomes the basis for you to be consistent. It also becomes the basis for you to build. Number three, it becomes the framework for every training cycle that you might do. It becomes the framework for every training cycle that you might do. And again, as I just talked about, from there you make variations that might be specific to that training cycle. And the thing that I think people don't quite get when I talk about this, is that it doesn't change that much. Whether you're training for a 5K or 10K, whether you're training for a half marathon or training for a marathon or you're in a recovery and maintenance mode, it should never change that much. You should year round hold space for each of the type of foundational runs, for example, that are important with a base routine. And then from there, you make modifications to make it specific, to do specific quality workouts that are gearing up towards the race you're targeting, to do specific long run builds that are gearing up towards the race you're targeting, to adjust up or down your volume depending on what you need, depending on whether you're trying to build volume or maybe recover and consolidate. It becomes the framework from which you make all of your adjustments. If you understand, again, if you understand that foundation, that home base, then you can build to almost anything you want. It also gives you a basis for understanding whether or not the adjustments you might plan to make as you tweak your framework are too much. Because again, you know what that base looks like. You know what the core consistent model looks like. And from there, you make small adjustments on top to continue to build volume over time, to add intensity over time, to modify the types of races that you might be training for. It all starts with the same framework, that same routine. Now, again, that doesn't mean that routine might not change and evolve over time for various reasons. But in general, all of the components that are there are going to stay there. And yeah, you make tweaks and adjustments based on schedule change, life change, season of life change, whatever it may be. But the core is always going to look relatively the same. And it's not that complicated, as we'll talk about here in a second, when we get into the structure of it. The fourth principle here is the idea that it doesn't have to be perfect. I think sometimes we let perfect be the enemy of good, especially when it comes to establishing a routine. We think if I can't do it perfectly or do it all, then I end up not doing any of it, or end up skipping a bunch of days, because you get discouraged by having misses or whatever it may be. Again, this doesn't have to be 100% every time. I like to say there's no such thing as a perfect training cycle. There's no such thing as a perfect routine either. There's always going to be a need for adjustments, and those might come from week to week. It might come from month to month. Whatever it may be, there will be adjustments. But again, if you have the fundamentals, if you understand the principles at which that routine is created, then you can make modifications off of it. Or you can say, hey, I missed that day. No big deal. Get right back on in my routine and continue forward. Or you might say, something is better than nothing, so I'm going to do a version of what I had planned to maintain that space, that hold in my routine. And then I live to fight another day and pick it up from there after whatever modification. So those are the things. Those are the key principles. There's probably more, but hopefully that helps you understand and emphasize the importance of it and why we think about it. And I don't think it's thought about often enough, hence this episode. So now I'm about to go into what are the components of a routine and how do they fit together? All of this has been covered, I think, in piece parts on my podcast. And so I'll point to different episodes you can go back to to get more depth as we go through it. But I wanted this one so that we can really pull it all together, think about it all at once. And hopefully, if you're going to come on with me, you're listening and you're doing some homework so that we can think about and establish the routine so that when we chat, we can then go beyond and think about building from that routine. So here we go. What are the components of a well-structured routine? What are the trees of the forest, so to speak? And I've got six things actually here to talk about. The first are the pillar runs. The pillar runs. The key runs during the week that really make the difference. And look, they all matter. But what are the key ones, the ones we think about, the ones we point to? And there are three in this context that I'm going to talk about. The first is the long run, the second the medium long run, third quality workout or speed workout. Those are our pillar runs. How do we structure our week so that those pillar runs are baked in, in a way that's safe, that's going to keep you healthy? And we'll give some examples. The first pillar run, the long run, perhaps the most important run, for those of us that are training for half marathons and marathons, because it really gives us that extended ability to develop aerobic capacity. It's probably the cornerstone too of establishing your routine, because where that long run fits, then helps you start to place the other pillar runs in their places. Often that's a weekend run, a Saturday or Sunday for most of us, but I have athletes that I coach that might do that during the week, if they've got a different work schedule that they're trying to operate around. But that is a critical run, and it's the most important run as it relates to building aerobic capacity. Those long, easy, distance runs help us build out our aerobic system from the inside out, from lung capacity to red blood cell count to capillary bed depth and breath to mitochondria count in our cells. All of those things are improved and built upon when we're doing our longer runs. And the long run is the most important part of that. And here's the secret you may not want to hear, which is that you should be doing long runs in some form or fashion more or less year-round. Certainly, there's going to be vacations where maybe it doesn't work, or periods of recovery from a race, or taper windows when those are a little bit shorter. But you should be doing long runs. Call it two-hour-plus runs more or less year-round. That is a foundational pillar to long-term improvement and success. And certainly, there will be ebbs and flows with it. And sometimes, there will be a little bit less when you're training for something that might be shorter, a little bit longer, obviously, when you're training for marathons. But you're doing long runs more or less year-round. You're doing really all of these more or less year-round. So that is a foundational pillar. Make sure you know what day it is, and try to do that as consistently as you can. There's a couple of episodes to look at on the long run specifically, episode 232 and episode 251, where I cover both the elements of the long run and also 251, where I talk about long run workouts and how to start layering those in over time. But you got to know where the long run fits. Quality workout, that's your speed workout. Quality is the vernacular we used to describe it. Episodes 73 and 74, we talk about what is quality, what does that look like, and how it might be changed and modified for different distances. But you'll have one speed workout a week, not more. And by speed, this is all varieties of speed. This is track intervals. This is tempo runs. This is in and out fart leaks. This is high intensity, 200 meter reps, to work on speed. This is anything where you're running faster. And obviously that can be structured in a lot of different ways, but you're going to do it one day a week, not two, by the way. Two workouts is a highly advanced form, and one that is very rare to be most beneficial, and I think only becomes most beneficial once you start to reach the limits of your aerobic capacity building. In lieu of a second speed workout, we think you get more bang for your buck out of the third pillar run, which is the medium long run, because that's another run that's focused on aerobic capacity building, which is more important than speed work in the grand scheme of you getting faster. And I know that's counterintuitive, but it's absolutely true. In episode, I believe in episode 306, I talk a little bit about that. Because remember, when you run long and you run easy, you build the size of your engine. To use a car analogy, you want a lot of cylinders. When you run fast, you fine tune the engine you have. So you take that four or six or eight cylinder and you rev it up and you get the most out of it. And so easy running, bigger engine, fast running, more, more finely tuned engine. At the end of the day, a max cylinder engine with eight beats, that's a revved up, highly fine, finely tuned four cylinder every day of the week. So we prioritize the medium long run over a second quality. So the third pillar here is medium long run. Episode 261, I talk about the magic of the medium long run. And that's your second longest run of the week, or at least it builds to be that. And that is also something that you should be doing year round. And dirty little secret here is that it may or may not change that much depending on what type of race you're training for. If you're able to get a longer medium long run in, 10 or 12 miles for a half cycle, a speed cycle, a marathon cycle, great, do it. Those longer medium long runs are gonna help you be a better 5K runner too, because they're gonna give you staying power when it comes to your speed. They're gonna help you be a better marathon runner too. And again, there may be an ebb and flow of that depending on your time and capacity. That might change. And perhaps you're only doing 6 to 8 mile medium long runs, and if that's where you are, that's great too. But we want to see that gradually if you can build over time. And by the way, that's something that stays year round. Once you recover from your race, you get back to rebuilding it. And even if you're in a maintenance mode or a base mode, you have a medium long run. So those are your 3 pillars. Long run, quality, speed run, and your medium long run. And those you want to be at least a day apart. So at least a day in between each. You don't want to do them back to back. What happens when we do them back to back? We get hurt. The most common theme I see in people getting injured is when they go from hard or long run to the next hard or long run without having active recovery, active recovery running in between. So you want a recovery run in between. And most importantly, that recovery run, which we'll talk about here as our second part of the structure, should come after your long runs and your quality runs, your most challenging runs of the week, which are those two pillars, the long run and the speed run. You don't necessarily need a recovery run after a medium-long run if you've managed that medium-long run at an easy enough effort, which it should be easy. Your long run and your medium-long run should both be at easy efforts. And I talk more about that in those sub-episodes. 232 for the long run, 261 for the medium-long run. So make sure those two pillars are at easy conversational paces, one minute per mile slower than marathon pace, or 90 seconds slower than half marathon pace, at least or slower than that. That's a good rule of thumb to use, but it's not the end all and be all. I just want to make sure that you are as far away from higher intensity heart rate zones as possible when you're doing those easy aerobic capacity building runs. Otherwise you start to get into a concept that we like to call junk miles, which is miles that aren't doing what you think they're doing. So keep long run and medium long run easy and your quality run, but you want to put those on days that are the same from week to week, at least in your base mode. And that could look like quality Tuesday, medium long run Thursday, long run Saturday. That could look like medium long run Monday, quality Wednesday, and then long run Saturday. Of course, there are variations off of that, but the rules of thumb are that you keep those pillar runs on the same days from week to week, and you have at least one day in between them, so that you're not doing them on back to back days. The other note here to make relative to the medium long run is that that's a day I also like you to do strides at the end of the run. Those short, controlled sprints that we've talked about in recent episodes that are in, to use a different medical analogy, I think those are allergy shots for speed. They help you become faster and more efficient, and that's something that I would slot in after the medium long run as a part of your routine. And those are your core pillars. So that's the first part of the routine. The second part are your recovery runs. And they're critical. I talk about those runs in episode 223 and 296. 223 being the main focus is recovery running. 296, I also talk about other recovery elements. But you got to be able to recover from the work that you're doing. And if you're running five days a week, which I believe everybody should aspire to run five days a week if they have big goals in their running, which would mean those three pillar runs plus two recovery runs, those recovery runs coming the day after your long run and the day after your quality. So those slot in accordingly. And if you're doing a third recovery run and doing six days a week, then that slots in either after your medium long run or after another day during the week. Now, your recovery runs are about movement and blood flow and healing. They're not about going fast at all. They should be easy, super easy paces. That you should feel better after you finish those runs than when you started, because you just came off a hard or long day. If you're doing that, then you're doing it right. They're also the shorter runs of the week, typically four to five, three to five miles is a good starting point for many people. But obviously you can build it from there depending on your overall weekly volume and how you aspire to build your overall weekly volume. But they're the glue that keep it all together. And to go back to what I was just talking about, or at least the examples I just gave about potential routines. If you had a Tuesday, Thursday, Saturday routine for quality, medium, long and long, then that would mean that your recovery runs would then slot in if you're doing five days a week on Wednesday after the quality day and on Sunday after the long-run day. And you'd have Monday off or Friday off, or if you're going to six days, you could run Monday or Friday to add that sixth day, but that should also be a relatively short, easy run. If your routine is Monday, Wednesday, Saturday, Monday, medium, long, Wednesday, quality, Saturday, long run, then your recovery runs first slot in on Thursday and Sunday with Tuesday and Friday off. And if you were doing six days, then you would typically slot that sixth day into that Tuesday or Friday slot, depending on what's better for your schedule. And that's where they fit. So once you have the pillars, slot in the recovery runs. And again, those should be relatively consistent from week to week. And you can flex those up and down, depending on whether you're in recovery, you're in taper, you're doing a certain type of race. Maybe you're just in a maintenance mode, because you're getting through a tough season of life, whatever it may be, you're holding space for those five or six runs, so that they have their place. And you're trying to, as consistently as you can, deliver on it. Every day having a purpose. Now, one question that I sometimes get is, for those that are further along in their journey, or who are really aspiring to do more running, seven days a week is something that comes up. Typically, I don't recommend that. I like having a day that's completely off. Now, of course, there may be something happening on that day, a walk, yoga, some sort of easy cross-training, but I like having one day a week off from running. In general, now, I do coach some people that do seven days a week because that's a routine that they like and that their body likes, and then you add essentially a fourth easy recovery type day to the equation in order to get to those seven days. But that is a pretty rare circumstance that I come across. Now, the other question I get is, well, what if I'm not specifically focused on training running there right now? Should I still do a quality workout? Should I still do a medium-long run? Should I still do a long run? And the answer is yes. If you want to reach your max potential, you'll keep those components more or less year round. Now again, you might scale them up or down in terms of distance or intensity, depending on your season of life or your phase of work. For example, during a base period or during a period where you're in maintenance mode and needing a little break from rigorous training, will you do quality? Sure. What would that quality look like? It could look as simple as another day where you do an easy run and strides after. Or a simple fart lick where you're doing 6 to 8 to 10 times 30 second pickups. We're just picking up the pace during that run on quality day a little bit in order to maintain some connection to your speed so that when you do go back to more formal workouts, you're ready and adapted to that, and it's not a big challenge or struggle to get back into that more rigorous routine. So the answer is yes. Yes, keep this structure more or less year round and scale up or down accordingly. And by the way, for really intense, stressful periods where maybe there's a lot of pressure, work life or family life or other pressure, again, maybe the running has to adapt. And that's okay. But you can keep the routine to the extent that you can. And to the extent that you can keep the routine, even if it's short runs on the five or six days a week that you normally run, even if they're short, even if they're not that differentiated, but you do have some differentiating based on these purposes, even if they're not anywhere near what you normally do. If you hold that routine, if you hold the place for it, then it'll become so much easier when you do have the space to ramp back up. And by the way, your fitness will be so much closer to where you want to be when you start back up versus if you just go to zero. And that's not to say there will be times when you have to go to zero in extreme situations, and that happens, and that's okay. And you have to not beat yourself up over that when it happens. But that's not what we're talking about here. We're talking about the year-round routine that you go back to when life is relatively in a homeostasis. So that's number two, your recovery runs. First, pillar runs, second, recovery runs. Third, strength. Where does strength fit? It does fit in an ideal world. If you're not doing it, that's okay. We'll talk a little bit about how to build it in. Because you can build it in in as small an increments as of increments as 15 to 20 minutes as a starting place. But it is important. It is important as a supplemental tool to help you not only stay healthy, but to be your fastest running self. And so over time, we all want to think about where it fits. And then there's two rules of thumb. I think about where strength fits into the routine. The first, the most optimal is that we want to first add strength if we can to the pillar run days, to the medium long run and the quality days during the week. After those runs, either right after or later in the day after those runs. With the idea that we want to keep our hard days hard if possible, so that our recovery days can remain focused on recovery, that's optimal. So if you're doing your medium long run Monday, your quality run Wednesday, then you would do strength sessions after those runs, either right after or later in the day on Monday and Wednesday. If you're doing your quality Tuesday and your medium long run Thursday, you would do your strength sessions later in the day, either right after or later in the day after those runs on Tuesday and Thursday. And that's where, in an optimal situation, those strength sessions would fit. Now, if that doesn't work, if you don't have the time or capacity to fit those in on those days, because that can be a lot of work, or it might seem like a lot of work, then that's okay. Then the question is, what other two days of the week can you do strength consistently? I don't like people doing strength on long run day, but almost every other day it can fit. And all that matters is if you can do it consistently on whatever two other days you can find. So if you're doing medium long run Monday, quality Wednesday, and you have to do your strength on Tuesday and Thursday, and maybe Tuesday is an off day, Thursday is a recovery day, and that's where the strength fits, great. My encouragement is if you are doing it on another day and you have a recovery run that day, that you do your recovery run first before you do the strength session. But you could do that as a warm up to a strength session. So you might have a quality Wednesday, you might do a 30 minute warm up in advance of your strength session on a Thursday, and that's a totally fine thing. And ultimately, your body will adapt to whatever routine you establish there. It may take four to six weeks to establish that routine and to feel comfortable in it, but your body will adapt if you give it time. And then of course, once you start getting into it, especially if you're in the rigor of a race specific part of a training cycle, then the makeup of that strength work might change when you get into the most rigorous weeks, the peak weeks of your training, because you might pull back so that you don't overdo it with the strength while you're trying to prioritize the most important running elements. But then it's just a matter of tailoring the strength training within those sessions so that you don't compromise the running that might be around it. So that's where strength fits. And if you're not doing strength right now, it's okay. I wouldn't necessarily jump in to doing it, especially if you're training for a specific race at the moment. I would want you to wait for a window where you're rebuilding, establishing base after maybe doing a race and coming back, and then build into a routine and give yourself time. I like to say at least four to six weeks, but it might take longer for you to really build it into your routine and start small in manageable, sustainable ways, maybe doing four or five exercises focused on key movements in 20 to 30 minutes. Each session, a couple of times a week, so that you establish the routine and get your body used to it. And then if you can do that consistently for three months, four months, five months, six months, then you can start layering more on top of it, but start in the smallest, most digestible form, create the habit first, and then start to do more. Because oftentimes, I find people are way too greedy. They try to do everything at once, and therefore, they end up doing none of it, because it's too high of an expectation. So that's the third piece, strength. It has its place. If you're not doing it, just make sure you wait till you're in a base or rebuild mode to add it. Don't add it if you're in the middle of a cycle already. Number four, other recovery elements. And I'm gonna highlight for the purposes of this conversation, sleep and fueling, the two other most important recovery elements besides recovery running, sleep and fueling. So establishing routine around that. What does that mean? What does that look like? Well, one, it means knowing what your sleep hours are and trying to generally keep them as consistent as possible. Now, obviously, that's gonna change and it's gonna flex from week to week. But in general, what is your sleep routine look like when you go to bed, when you wake up, and how does that change throughout the week, depending on what you're doing and depending on the ebb and flow of your pillar runs? Remember, sleep is your number one recovery tool. Your number one recovery tool. That's where the body rebuilds itself. And if you're not prioritizing it, then we have a challenge and you're going to have a challenge. So how does it fit? Doesn't have to be perfect, no, but it does need to be a priority. And you need to think about your base sleep routine so that you can get in as many hours as you can of it. The other thing here, we're going to talk about fueling. And this is a big topic. There's a lot of things we could talk about from a fueling standpoint. I'll talk most importantly, or I'll talk about one of the most important elements of fueling, especially for recovery, which is your post-workout, post-long-run fueling, and making sure that you establish a routine around those two big pillar runs and the fueling you're going to get immediately after it within 90 minutes. You should be eating filling, well-balanced carbs, fats, proteins, meals after those two pillar runs a week. You should not be doing a quality workout, grabbing a bar, and running to work, and then not eating until lunch. That is not a recipe for helping your body get the building blocks for recovery that it needs. Because two things happen in that recovery, or at least two things, more than two, but two I like to highlight, happen in that recovery fueling period. One is that you are most able to restore carbs as glycogen in the best quantities after a hard workout. So if we're going to carbo load, so to speak, carbo loading post workout to rebuild the glycogen storage for the next long-runner workout is actually where the most carb loading, carb storage, glycogen storage happens. Second thing is that that fueling, especially if it's well balanced, carbs, fats, proteins, gives your body the building blocks for recovery, because after you do the hard thing, it's looking for those building blocks, and it's wanting to put those building blocks straight to work, to rebuild your working muscles. And if they're there, because you provided them in the course of a solid recovery meal, then your body's ready to go to work on recovery. If it's not there, then your body isn't able to have those recovery building blocks ready, and it's going to curb or delay recovery. By the way, hydration is an important part of that equation too, because we need H2O as a building block of recovery, but that comes with a good recovery meal where you're also getting rehydrated post hard run or workout. What are your routines around that? Don't skip it. Usually it's easier for people after a long run on a Saturday, but sometimes they don't prioritize it. I often find that it's harder during the week after the quality session, because people want to run straight to their next thing, and maybe you have to, but bring up a well-filling meal or protein-oriented smoothie that's got plenty of macronutrients with you along the way. So that's number four. Making sure your core recovery elements are in place. If you want to add other things to that, you can, but start with those two things, because they're the most important in addition to your recovery running. The fifth thing is other supplemental things that you need in order to make it all fit together. And this is the part where it might be, or it is, very specific to you. The sort of other supplemental activities, that is all very specific to you and what you need to feel like your best self. And what are the components that might fall into this other supplemental bucket? It could be spending time on the foam roller. Could be spending time in meditation. Could be spending time in the sauna. Could be spending time doing cold plunge, although I wouldn't recommend overdoing that. Could mean yoga. Could mean other aerobic cross-training. That is low intensity and low impact. And that's going to look a little bit different for everybody. And maybe none of those things are on your list because you're maxed out with the things I've already mentioned. But to the extent that you think those other things are important to you, or maybe you layer them in over time, you want to figure out roughly where does it fit within your routine. I'll give you an example for me specifically. One, I need to spend time working on mobility, particularly with a foam roller involved. And so I have dedicated time in my week where I am spending time on the foam roller and I'm doing basic mobility work, particularly focused on my ankles and my hips. That is built into my routine. I do it before each lifting session, which for me falls on Tuesday and Thursday at lunch. And I often do it in the evening as well. Typically right before I wind down for bed, that that's another window. But it's only 10 minutes at a time that I do this thing. So it's not like it adds a whole bunch of time to my routine. But for me, that is a critical component in order to maintain mobility with my ankles. That helps prevent injury. It's not something everybody needs to do, but it's something that's important to me and that fits into my base routine. And so for you, what do those things look like? I know there's people that really love to meditate. I know there's people that really love to do yoga. Where does it fit for you? What are those other things that are important to you? And they shouldn't feel like a burden. They should feel like things that you want to do. They should feel like things that help you create balance, that make, they make, give you joy, that make it all feel better and be more fun. Shouldn't these things shouldn't generally feel like a burden. And if they do, then maybe it shouldn't be on your supplemental, your other supplemental list. Okay, so that's the five key elements of the structure. My sixth point, it's actually not a new element, but really thinking about how it all comes together. You've got five things. The pillar runs, long run quality, medium long run. The recovery runs that come after the long run of the quality. The strength sessions. The other recovery pieces, particularly sleep and post-workout, post long run fueling. And five, the other supplemental things that you need for it all to work, for it all to fit together, for you to stay healthy, and for you to stay happy along the way. Now the sixth and last point I'll make here is that if you can establish those five things, you establish them first. You establish them in a way that makes it feel like you can begin to do it without thinking about it. And it takes three to six months to build that type of habit. And then from there, you can build. Now, as you're listening to this, you might be saying, man, Chris, that's a lot of stuff. I'm busy with work. I'm busy with family. I'm busy with all sorts of things. I'm not sure I can fit all of that in. And I'm here to tell you one that you can. I coach people from all backgrounds, with all types of situations. And if you are prioritizing these things, you can create a routine where it fits. And it is less daunting than you think in practice if you're committed to giving it a shot. Secondly, do it incrementally. If you're not all the way here, that's okay. I don't want you to try to get there all at once. Start with the runs. Let's get those embedded into your routine. And if the other stuff isn't quite ready yet, or you don't have the capacity to add the other stuff yet, then that's okay. Add that in over time. Create yourself a road map that starts to look over longer periods of time, where you built it in over that time. Because one of the biggest mistakes I see is that people who are starting from scratch or starting from a routine that isn't as complete as this, they try to do everything at once. And build their volume and train for their first marathon, and do the hardest speed workouts they've ever done. They try to do it all at once. And again, we're talking about long term here. So layer it in patiently, layer it in gradually. You don't have to do it all at once. You've got 10, 15, 20 years of improving your running if you're willing to think long term. So this is when you turn off this episode, and you go back to my Forest for the Trees episode, and you go back and listen to that and re-create that long term mindset. Because this episode's been about talking about planting the trees, the individual trees of the forest. That episode is about making sure you can picture the whole forest and view the big picture, the long term picture. Both are important. You can't get to success, to smashing goals you never thought possible without both outlooks. And we kind of have to bounce between the two. Planting trees and thinking about the individual trees to then going back up and looking at the forest and seeing how it all fits together and making sure we're keeping that long-term, patient mindset. Because we can't do all of this at once if you're not there now. But can you do it? Can you build to it over time? Absolutely. And anybody who's listening, regardless of your degree of fast, regardless of where you are in your journey, you can get to a place where you're executing out on a routine like this. And if you can, and you can do it consistently, not just for a few weeks, but for months, years, and ultimately decades, you are going to do things in this sport that you cannot dream about right now. It's a fact. I've seen it so many times. And that's when the really fun stuff happens. But it starts with individual actions, day by day. Again, none of it's sexy necessarily, but when you add it all up, it creates a forest that's really damn cool. So hopefully this helps you now balance the two perspectives, both the detail and the big picture, if you put those two episodes together. So that's it. We'll wrap it here. My big routine episode. Go plant your trees. Do them one at a time. You will establish a routine that will get you places you never thought possible. So with that, we'll wrap this one. As always, you can check us out at roguerunning.com, or check us out on Facebook or Instagram at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.