Hey everybody, welcome to another episode of the Running Rogue Podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung, coming to you from Austin, Texas. We're back to another solo episode today as I've gotten a lot of questions on the backs of the routine episode I did a couple of episodes ago about how to appropriately integrate strength training into your routine. And so today I'm gonna talk about not just the integration into the routine, but also the things you should be thinking about in terms of managing your strength training to make sure that it is additive, that it builds upon your running and doesn't take away from it. And I see a lot of mistakes in this space. So we're gonna talk about it. And this will be perhaps a relatively short and sweet episode. We'll see as we get into it, but I've got five principles to think about as you build your strength training. Before we get there quickly, wanted to say happy holidays as we wrap up 2024. I will be doing another episode next week as well, but I'm taking a break from the coaching episodes while we're working through the holidays, and we'll get back to those in the new year. So if you're interested in those, certainly still continue to email me, chris at roguerunning.com. As well, next week, I'm going to be doing a solo Q&A episode answering your questions. I've gotten some of those already in the emails that I've gotten interested in coaching conversation. So I've queued those up, and I'll be queuing up other questions that I would love to answer for you on the podcast. So if you have a question that is more defined that might lend to a quick answer, then send those over in the next five or six days or so to chrisatroguerunning.com so that I can get to those questions on next week's episode. So that'll be coming as my last episode of 2024. Beyond that, wanted to quickly let you know that we're going to be opening the Rogue Renegades, the podcast training-based group that I coach with James. To the public, we're opening up the sign-ups here coming up in a few weeks on January 6th to start our 15th season of the Renegades for those training for spring races, primarily those focused on April to June races. Whether you're doing 5K, 10K, half marathon or marathon, we've got a spot for you. And that group is particularly geared towards those that are already doing 40 plus miles a week for that more experienced runner who's already at that level. We have another group, Rogue Rising, that will also be open for those that are not yet to that level and who want to rise and build to a more consistent volume level. So both of those will be open in January. Rising is open right now. Renegades will open January 6th through usually about three weeks in January, and then we'll shut it down again and you won't be able to get in until June. So that's coming. If you're interested, you could always ask questions of us at coaching at roguerunning.com, or you can go to the website, click on the train button, and then you'll see virtual group training as an option. Click in there and you can learn more information about those virtual groups and working with me in that format. So that's what we've got for intro items. Let's jump into my topic, which is how can we make sure that strength training is supporting our running in the right ways? And I've got five tips for you. I actually recently shared these five tips with a group of strength coaches that work for a local Austin business called Infinite Fitness, one of my favorite strength organizations and quote gyms, although I don't really consider them a traditional gym in Austin. They do individual and small group training that is very, very focused on the fundamentals that would help any runner. So if you happen to be in Austin, I would check out Infinite Fitness. They've got a location in North Austin as well as out in Steiner Ranch, and they've got one coming soon in the Round Rock area. But love Infinite Fitness. I've been working with them personally for the last two and a half years, working with the owner of Infinite Jonas. And it's been a great addition to my running routine as I've integrated strength more consistently over the last couple of years. So that is not a paid ad, but definitely a plug I give to them. But I was talking to their coaches a couple of weeks ago on one of their team calls gave this rundown of things I would want them to think about in supporting runners in their strength training. And as I was giving this little mini talk to their group, I thought this would be an applicable way to talk about strength on the podcast. And then, of course, I got a bunch of questions about strength associated with my routine episode. And so here we are talking about strength. Before I get into the five principles I want to talk about today, I want to talk about strength training generally and how it fits into the overall equation. First of all, strength is important. It is important. And as we age, it becomes even more paramount, as I talked about on that routine episode. So it's important and you need to be doing it. Now if you're not doing it right now, that's okay. You don't have to start today. We want to make sure you do integrate it in the right ways over time. But it is important and you should be thinking about over the next three months, six months, year, how to integrate it into your routine. So everyone should be thinking about how strength training fits for them if they want to be their best running self. Certainly if they want to be their healthiest running self. Now, the caveat to that is that strength training should be in support of your running and not the other way around. Or strength training shouldn't be primary. It should be in support of your running so that it supports the goals you have on your running journey. It supports the ways you need to stay healthy in your running journey. Just like we do things in training, in recovery to support our running, this is another category of supplemental training that will help you be your best running self. As a side note, some people like to call strength training cross-training. I actually don't consider strength training cross-training for runners. This is a subtle, perhaps semantic thing. But from my vantage point, cross-training for runners is other low-impact aerobic work that helps you develop your aerobic system to cross-train your aerobic system for your running needs. That's different. There are also other supplemental training tools and modalities that help you be your best, strongest, healthiest running self. And strength training is one in that category. So this isn't cross-training. This is supplemental training. And it is important, supplemental training. Everyone that is serious about getting big goals needs to be thinking about how strength training fits into their routine or how they need to add it and integrate it. Now, again, it's supplemental. It doesn't have to be this big, massive thing, because small steps taken consistently over not just weeks, but months and years, and ultimately decades, are going to be the things, the steps that will get you to your goals. It's not about big heroic efforts. It's about small steps taken consistently. And for those that don't have strength training yet integrated into their plan, then you should be thinking about doing it in the smallest, most bite-sized, most digestible possible way, so that you have the greatest chance for you to integrate that into your routine in a sustainable way, so that eventually you can build upon it and expand it and do more with it. And certainly, if you're already doing more with it, don't back off or pull back from what you're doing. But if you're not yet there, and it's hard for you to get there, as it was, and has been for me at times in my journey, then that's okay. But I want you to add it and do it in small bite-sized ways so that it fits, so that you can make it sustainable, so that you can continue to do it. Because small steps executed consistently, even 15, 20, 30-minute sessions a couple of times a week, will make a massive difference if those steps, those routines are repeated week after week, month after month, ultimately year after year. And again, you can always expand that habit, but it's really, really hard to sustain it if you jump in and do too much too soon and it's not sustainable. So that's the overarching message before we get into these five principles. Strength is important, but it is supplemental. You are a runner first, and you strength train to support your running, which means that every decision you make in the weight room should be made with that idea in mind. And so that's where we get to these five ideas, these five principles to make sure you're optimizing your strength training in a way that is supplemental, that is supportive, versus becoming exercise on its own. Okay, so what are the five principles to think about as you build your strength training routine? And again, the one that is going to be supplemental to your running and not take a primary position over it. The first principle is that you should, in general, never be sore from your strength training. You should, in general, never be sore from the strength training that you're doing. Now, caveat being, when you start a routine, those first two to three weeks, especially if you haven't done this ever before, you're gonna be sore when you first start. But once you get into the routine over a few weeks, then you shouldn't be experiencing that. And I would actually submit that even those that are new should be doing it at weights and reps levels that aren't actually making them sore either. So you start really, really small with baby steps, integrate it into your process, and then gradually build it over time. So I actually think you could throw away that caveat, but I know it can be hard when you're starting to not be sore. But after that, if you're finding yourself sore the next day, and that might happen on occasion, after a strength workout or two days after a strength workout, then that means you've done too much. Too much weight or too many reps, and you need to back off on one or both of those. We are not in the gym to understand our one rep maxes. We are not in the gym to work to failure. We might do that in the context of running, but we are not in the gym to work to failure. That might have a place in some people's realms who are trying to get different things out of their strength training, but if you're trying to be your best running self, I would submit that you should not be operating in that way. You shouldn't be sore. You shouldn't be working to failure. You shouldn't be testing your max reps. Sure, sometimes you might do weight levels where you're only doing two or three reps, and that might be important to building overall power, but you shouldn't be sore from it the next day because you're operating in a weight level that's appropriate. So make sure that you operate at a weight level and a rep level that doesn't make you sore. In general, on those dimensions, I don't ever want you doing more than 10 reps, usually 4 to 6 to 8. And you should be doing weights that are very, very manageable to achieve 4 to 6 to 8 reps without having major challenges or certainly needing somebody like a spotter. Yes, use a spotter if you need for safety purposes, but you shouldn't need it. So that is a very, very important thing. And I get it. Our ego wants us to push and to show how strong we can be and be able to talk about sometimes the numbers associated with rep maxes or whatever it may be. But that is not serving your running. Strength training is supplemental. It is supportive of your running. It is not there for the ego in and of itself. And again, if you are at a place where you're doing too much, or if you're sore the next day, then that's just a sign. It's okay if it happens, but it's just a sign, a note to self to say, all right, next time I'm going to pull back on the weight or I'm going to pull back on the reps in order to make sure that I'm not sore the next day. And then you do it again and you see where you're at and you proceed accordingly. So yeah, there's certainly space to make mistakes and learn from them, but you should not be making that mistake over and over again. And I promise you, you can build strength without being sore the next day. That is a myth and perception of mostly, I think, the American way of doing things, that if we're not suffering or hurting or ripped apart the next day, where we can't lift our arms or can't bend our legs, then we didn't do it hard enough. That is an American myth that is not serving you as a runner. So set that aside, set your ego aside, do manageable reps with manageable weights where you're not sore the next day. I promise you, you will still get stronger. And I promise you, it will be in support of your running, and it also won't compromise your ability to then go do the next run or the next workout or the next long run. I've been working out with heavier weights, doing Olympic style lifting moves for the last two and a half years with Jonas from Infinite Fitness. I can count on one hand the number of times where I've been sore the next day, and I've gotten stronger throughout that entire journey. And in fact, Jonas will want me to tell him when I'm sore the next day, because if I am, he will back me off. And if you're not working with a trainer, then you should do it on your own. But if you are, then you should let them know that that's how you want to operate. Again, this one's tough for us because it requires some unwiring of things that we think we've been taught about how we get the most out of our strength training. And again, there may be a need if you're trying to do power lifting or you're specifically working on building your one rep maxes and all of that. There will be a time and a place where maybe with a different focus, a different sport, those things would be important to you. But if running is your focus, if you want to get your best times and hit those goals in your running, then you shouldn't be sore because of your strength training. And I promise you, you can still get a lot stronger doing it that way, even if that's not how we've been programmed. Now, there may be some of you that say, hey, well, I want to do that sometimes. I want to spend some time working on those things. And that can be okay. It can have a place, but in a phase of training, where you're not specifically targeting running goals. So yes, maintain your running routine, the home base I talked about a couple of weeks ago. But maybe go into a window if certain weight, volume and rep volume is important to you, where you just focus on strength. And strength becomes a primary for a little window. You maintain the running routine underneath that in order to accomplish whatever your goals might be from a strength standpoint. And then you get back to your running focus and you flip it. Now, again, that may not be everybody out there, but there may be a few of you who actually care about that. And if so, that's fine, but just make sure that that's a dedicated block of work where you've explicitly decided to flip what's primary and what's secondary. And during that time, I would want you to still maintain a running routine so that when you do get back to your running, you're not starting from scratch. So that's number one. You should never be sore from your strength training. And if you are, back off on the reps, back off on the weight. Number two, it should be integrated and built into your routine in a way that supports the running. We talked about this on the routine episode. I'm going to reiterate it now. My number one preference for where you place your strength training is on the same day as your medium long run and your quality or speed workouts during the week. Those two days, either right after those runs or later in the day on those runs, or on those run days. If it's not possible to do it on those days, that's okay. That's optimal, but there's many other possibilities. And the second choice would be to find two other days that you can do those strength sessions as consistently as possible, as routinely as possible from week to week, so that your body adjusts to the load and to the routine. So if you can't do it on the medium long run and quality days later in the day or right after those runs, then pick two other days and do it as consistently on those two other days as you can. Now the nuance there with that second rule is that sometimes you might have to make decisions about your strength training as you get closer to your race specific phase or to your race day that might accommodate whatever those days might live around. So for example, if you do your long runs on Saturday and you need to consistently do one strength day on a Friday, that might mean that as you get to the point where you're doing 20 mile runs in a marathon cycle, that you're pulling back on some of the leg emphasis work that you're doing on that Friday, maybe putting that on the other day during the week so that you're not compromising your long run. So that becomes something that plays a factor or a role when you can't optimally place strength training on the medium long run and quality days. It's still okay. And again, your body will adapt to that load and routine, but you then just need to make sure that you're still thinking. You're still understanding how it all fits together so that when you do get those two, those more difficult run windows, then you're adjusting your strength training accordingly to make sure that it's still supplemental, that it's not taking away because we don't want strength to take away from our running, from our performance, from our ability to recover, to go then do the fast or long thing. We want to support it. We want to uplift it. And so that might mean when those days sit close to each other, that you make adjustments to the body parts you might be working on different days in order to make sure that it's all additive. So it should be seamlessly built into your routine. Now what happens when you need to make adjustments? That's okay. Life happens. You gotta move it from one day to another. But then again, you should be thinking about the ripple effect. Think about the runs that it might affect either before or after, and make decisions accordingly. Because you can always show up and do lighter weight, do different body parts, do more of an emphasis on mobility or body weight work versus heavy weights. You can always make adjustments to make a session a little bit milder. But if you keep it somewhere and then get something out of it, then it'll still be additive. But then you have to again make those mental adjustments to rework the work, rework the content of that session in order to make sure it doesn't compromise what you might have moved it close to. So that's how you think about those adjustments. And remember, no one day matters in the grand scheme of things. So if you need to pull back at any point, still do something, still show up for the work, but pull back so that it doesn't affect the runs around it, then that's the right call. And you can't know how to optimize that perfectly perhaps, but you can trust your instincts, make the adjustment, step into whatever next thing you need to do, and then look back and ask yourself, hey, I made this adjustment, was it the right adjustment? How did I feel in my run the next day? What can I learn from that? And how could I make a better choice next time? Or maybe it confirms like, hey, that seemed to have been balanced exactly right. And if I have to make an adjustment like that in the future, I will be okay. And I'll make that similar call because it seemed to work. So always learn, always learn from those decisions. Trust your gut, make the decision, learn from it, move on, iterate, and that's all you can do. So number two is that it needs to be as seamlessly built into your routine as possible. And this is the part where I want to talk about adding it to your program. Because if you're not doing strength right now, and I talked a little bit about this on the episode a couple of weeks ago, if you're not doing strength right now, you need to think about adding it, but you don't need to add it today. You need to think about where you want to add it. And if you're in the middle of a racing cycle or starting to get into a racing cycle for a race that might be in April or May, and you haven't done any strength before, this may not be the time to add it. You want to add strength when you have plenty of space to add it, meaning you're either in the priming phase, base building phase of your training, or you're on the back of finishing a race, you've recovered from that race, and then you have a little bit of a gap before you get back into rigorous training again. That could be a window at works. But it's going to take four to six to eight weeks to fully adapt to the integration of strength training into your work. And if you're in the middle of a training cycle, you're not going to be able to do it in a way that's sustainable without compromising that A race that you might be building to. So I want you to be smart about it. Don't jump to it now, but find a window where you're able to pull back your running to base mode, or you're already in a running base mode. You're still running. You still got that routine. Add your strength. Do two 30-minute sessions a week with basic exercises, and I'll talk about that in a minute. Get it integrated. Feel good about doing it. See how it affects the runs around it. Manage the weights and the reps so that you're not sore the next day. Figure all that stuff out so that when you do get into a phased race-specific training mode with an A-race in mind, it's integrated versus trying to add it while you're also trying to build towards an A-race. I don't find that that works. Once you get into the strength phase of training, which is that second phase before race-specific, before taper, it's too late to add it. I wouldn't add it then. Add it when you have a window to add it, either early in a priming phase, or in a base phase, or in between cycles, while you're still maintaining maintenance mileage. That's where it fits, to add it. Otherwise, you're going to compromise your goals. So that's number two. It's got to be seamlessly built into your routine. Number three, focus on the core movements and mobility. Focus on the core movements and mobility, meaning you're not necessarily trying to work the vanity muscles. We're not doing a lot of bicep curls as runners. It doesn't support our running. It doesn't really support longevity either. There's five core movements. Push, pull, hinge, squat, and then core. Some people label those differently or might even add other things. But those are the core movements, and you want to be integrating elements from each of those into that routine, that strength routine, so that you're hitting all the things that are important to you to be a better athlete and better runner. Push, that's like pushups. Pull, that's rows and pull downs and pull ups. Hinge, that's deadlifts and single leg deadlifts. Squats, straightforward, straight up back squats or front squats. Core, planks, and anything that activates those core muscles. And you want to make sure that you're doing not just static movements, not just front and back, but also side and rotational movements for the core to make sure that you're strong and stable within, because that really allows you to keep that strong running posture throughout your runs, throughout those longer runs, throughout those long races, so that you don't lose your form as you progress through harder efforts. Those are the core movements. And you want to make sure that you're moving through those different exercises and routines in a way that is done soundly, with good form. That's where I really think for somebody who's new to this, you may not have the money to hire a personal trainer full time, but I do recommend you find someone, maybe for one, two, three, four sessions, who can help you at least establish a routine and make sure you're doing those exercises appropriately and safely. Because if you're doing it wrong, if your form is bad, then that's not going to serve you, and you might get injured doing it. So make sure that you're doing it well, and pick one to two exercises from each of those categories, create a little routine around it, and just start doing it consistently. Again, small actions, small steps, done consistently over weeks, months, years. It's going to be more powerful than big, crazy sessions that you do once, and get too sore, and you never come back to. So that's number three. Make sure you're focused on the core movements. All of those core movements will help you be a better runner, because they break down the motions that we need to have strong, consistent, well-balanced form with all of our muscles active so that you can run as fast as you're able and do it in a healthy way. That's number three. Number four, your strength training should be phased appropriately. Should be phased appropriately. And you're going to phase strength training in a similar way to how you phase your run training. Let me say that again. You're going to phase your strength training in a similar way to how you're going to phase your running training. Now, when you're new to it, I wouldn't necessarily be worried about this step. But as you have established the routine and you get to the point where you can consistently execute a basic set of exercises, then you can start to think about phasing. This is also where it's helpful to have a strength coach or a personal trainer who can help you think about the phasing. But in general, it's going to line up similarly to our run training in terms of the phases versus the priming phase on the running side. And so when you're priming with strength training, you are integrating exercises, you are building into weight. If you've had a bit of a deload period post a big race or after a taper and recovery period. And so you start to rebuild that routine, reinsert exercises and weights that maybe you've and build up in those weights that maybe you've taken a break from, just like you might have taken a break from or at least a deloaded training window for your running. So priming, you're kind of rebuilding that routine, basically trying to become fit enough to train. Then you get into the strength phase. In the running side, we call that aerobic strength or endurance, or the time where we're working on our ability to sustain slightly uncomfortable paces for longer, longer periods of time. And when you correlate that to strength, then it is actually about raw strength or muscular strength, where you're focused on raw strength, building volume, perhaps building reps at a certain volume, so that you have more strength within the core movements than you did in the priming phase. So the second phase for strength is about simply raw strength. Then on the running side, the third phase is the race-specific phase, where you start to work on race-specific pacing, as well as working faster paces to make race pace feel easier. When we correlate that to strength, then we can start working on power and coordination. And this is where you can work on faster movements, moving heavier weight with more explosiveness, doing plyometrics, perhaps in a very basic and light way to start, or maybe in an amplified way, if you've already integrated it in the strength phase in some way. So in this phase, this power phase, we're working on power and explosiveness and moving weight quickly, or moving our muscles quickly to improve that neuromuscular coordination, that ability to really be an athlete, which will translate into your running stride. And then of course, fourth phase is taper, where you're deloading your running, meaning you're reducing volume. You still have quality workouts, but they're perhaps a little bit lower in intensity or duration. And you're preparing the mind and the body to be as fresh as possible for race day. Meanwhile, during the strength element of that, you're also tapering your strength. I generally want people to maintain their routine. And so you start to pull back on weight, pull back on intensity from a strength perspective. Maybe in those final two weeks prior to a marathon, go only to body weight work or to mobility. Potentially even dropping strength altogether in that final week, if you want to, so that you are as rested and prepared to go do the big thing on the big day when it comes. So you taper your strength just like you taper your running, so that you're ready to go when the A-race arrives with all of your available capacities that you built through all of that hard work. So make sure it's phased appropriately. And again, if you're newer to the journey, then your phasing might be a little bit more simplistic. It might be consistently the same set of exercises for the first three phases while you're building that routine, while you're building that capacity and aptitude and initial strength to make sure that you can do it fundamentally and consistently versus really doing it at a higher level with more strength and more power. So maybe you're doing all the same things for the first three phases, but then you taper just like everybody else, where you're starting to pull back your lowering weight, keeping the routine, always keep the routine in the taper, same number of runs, same number of sessions from a strength standpoint, pull back the weight, maybe go to just bodyweight and mobility for those final weeks. Okay, that's four phase that work appropriately. And number five, you want to manage your strength training with a long term view. You want to manage your strength training with a long term view, just like with our running, when we can continue to get better, faster for not just years, but ultimately decades if we're consistent about it. That's the way you want to think about your strength training too. Consistency trumps brute force every day of the week, not just for your running, but also ultimately for your longevity. If you are stacking a couple of strength sessions a week for years, then decades, you're gonna be really, really prepared to deal with the aging process. You're also gonna be a really fundamentally and healthy and strong runner. It's not to say you're never gonna get hurt. It's not to say you won't have challenges, but you will be stronger for it. And that strength comes again, not from one big session, not from trying to figure out what your best max can be, but rather from doing consistent exercises that aren't killing you, that aren't making you sore, week in and week out, month in, month out, year in, year out. And ultimately, you will be stronger, you will be faster, you will be more resilient, healthier as a runner because of it, but it's not because of one session. And so what does that mean? That means that when you're making decisions about your training, both in the short term and in the long term, and in a present day moment, it should be done with that long term view in mind, with the forest in mind, not the trees. And so if you show up on a day to your strength session, and you're not feeling well, maybe you didn't sleep well, or maybe you're a little bit sick, or maybe you had a really hard workout that was a little bit over indexed and put you to the well a little too deeply, then maybe you make the decision to pull back on that day. If you're working by yourself, you'll have to make that decision yourself. If you're working with a trainer, you tell them, say, hey, I went to the well, or I'm a little bit beat up, and banged up, or tired, and I need to pull back today. And pull back. Do it. Cut the weight by half. Cut the reps. Whatever it may be. Make the choice to make it easier. Go to just body weight. Make the choice to make it easier. Because something is better than nothing, dramatically better. But it's also better to make the choice to do the easier thing when your body is not ready for more. Or if you get into a session and you overdo it, you overindex on weight at one point for one body part, and that really zaps you or takes it out of you, then maybe you adjust the rest of the session and you pull back. You're never going to be able to make a perfect decision, but you will, if you listen, be able to trust your gut, make a decision, reflect on it afterwards, learn from it, and then iterate from there. And then the next time, you'll know, did I make the right call there, or did I need to learn from it and do a different thing in order to make sure that I can live to fight another day? And that's what this is all about, living to fight another day, taking a long-term view, never being sore, not being worried about brute force, being worried more about consistency, small actions, taking day by day. That's where excellence comes from. Simple, simple as that, especially in our sport. It's a long game. It's not a short-term game. And I know we want to post the big amazing thing on our social media and or be able to talk about at least some of us. But that isn't what's going to get you the big goals. It's not the thing that's going to get you max potential. The thing that will get you max potential is the small things that may not be that sexy or shareable, but that give you just the right stimulus to take that next small step so that you can then eventually get to that big, big goal. That's number five. Manage your strength training with a long-term view. Consistency over brute force. Let me quickly wrap these five again, and then I've got one comment about how to choose a trainer or a strength coach if you are looking for one. So don't go anywhere. But first, never soar. When in doubt, do less. And if you do find yourself sore, make an adjustment the next time. Two, make sure it's built seamlessly into your routine so that it fits. Three, focus on the core movements and mobility doing those exercises the right way. Number four, phase your strength training appropriately. And number five, manage it with a long term view, consistency over brute force. Now with that, all of that in mind, I want to talk about choosing a trainer as we wrap it up here. And there's a lot of great trainers out there, but there's also a lot of ones that have just done enough to get their personal training certification, and you don't know how to support runners in the right way. They may be out there doing it for the brute force part of this equation and not knowing how to make sure that it's supplemental. So I would highly encourage you, if you're looking for a strength coach, to be discerning about it. There are good ones out there in every city that know how to work with runners or who work with other runners, just like choosing any provider in this space, that might work with runners like medical doctors, PTs, chiropractors, all of those folks. Get a recommendation, talk to people, talk to local running store, talk to your own club, talk to your friends who are runners, talk to those people in your community that are doing what you do that have the goals that you have and ask them, hey, who do you use for strength training? And find recommendations and then have a conversation with that person about the elements of this philosophy, about strength that I'm talking about. So they understand where you're coming from, hear where they are coming from, see if there's an alignment on philosophy, and then step into working with them. Because you want to find someone who gets it, who knows how to treat the strength training as supplemental, as secondary, so that it can support your running in the best possible way. And that isn't going to be everybody out there. So be discerning. Get a recommendation from somebody local to you. Interview them, talk to them, try them out, and find that person who's right for you, who fits the philosophy that's going to support your goals as a runner first. All right. With that relatively short and sweet episode, we're going to wrap it here. Thanks to all of you for listening. Happy holidays, everybody. As always, you can check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Facebook or Instagram at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.