Hey, everybody, welcome to episode 366 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung, coming to you from Austin, Texas. Excited to be back with you today with another coaching conversation. Had a few of these, but had a little bit of a break while I was getting my stuff in order, and now we're gonna have at least the next two episodes will be coaching conversations. I'm excited to bring this listener on because she's been an athlete of mine as well, although I've been taking a little bit of break from training. So this is gonna be basically a coaching catch up conversation with someone I've worked with before. But I'm excited to welcome Nicole Ledesma to the show. Nicole, how are you?

Good, good. Thanks for asking. How are you doing, Chris?

I'm doing well. Excited to see you. It's been a minute.

Me too. Yeah. I was just in the car thinking the other day how long it had been. I'll be 35 this year. So it was, I think I started with Rogue when I was 25. It was in 2015. Has it been 25 years? Yeah. Yeah. Just about. I know. It's really odd to think about because, yeah, it was right when I met Wendy and a whole group of people, but they've all been in my life. So you have been in my life for almost a decade now.

That's crazy. Well, now you're making me feel old, but that's awesome too. And what a journey it's been. And yeah, we've had a little bit of a break since working together. I know you're on your way to building back, but we'll talk about all of that. So this is basically an opportunity for us to catch up, for you to get some questions asked and you had reached out to say, hey, I'd be willing to jump on if you're willing to have me on and here we are.

Yeah, I was just listening to a LifeKit episode from NPR the other day about accountability partners. I didn't know there was an entire profession behind it. There's just ways to help people stay motivated, whether they're trying to write a book or run a marathon. And I was like, please help me with accountability. It's one of the things that's so hard when you're coming back and you're still alone, kind of. Definitely. Yeah.

So cool. Well, let's get a little bit of context for the listeners before we jump in to where you are now. So first, just tell us who you are. You've already said 35 years old, live in Austin, but who are you? What do you do?

All that kind of stuff. Yeah. So yeah, I've been in Austin also a very long time. I moved here in 2009, and I've been here ever since. I'm originally from San Antonio. Yeah, I was pretty stereotypically a military family, and my dad retired there, and that's where I grew up. And came to Austin without a lot of, without really knowing what I was going to do and why I was really here. But I ended up staying here through college, through grad school, through adult life. Met my partner here, who's originally from Boston. Yeah, we've been just living on the east side. My parents have since moved here. My brother's here. So yeah, it's really just become home more than I think San Antonio was so long ago. But I work in software and sort of have been balancing my hobbies, like running with my career and being with my family and starting my life with Dan.

Yeah. Love it. How long have you all been married now?

So I think it'll be five years this year. Yeah. So we did, we loved during the pandemic, and we had already been together at four years at that point. We knew we were going to get married, so we were like, well, let's just go down to the courthouse, get married, and move forward with our lives. It was very quiet just by family. Yeah, we've been together, yeah, almost five years, which is also crazy to think about.

I'm flying.

All these milestones are flying by.

That's crazy. Wow. Five years. And even to just think about that going back to near the beginning of the pandemic, I mean, it seems like yesterday, but also forever ago, it's such a weird time that created for everybody.

Yeah. I started dating Dan when I started running. I think it was like the first, we were dating and very casually, and I was like, I think I'm going to run a marathon. And I didn't realize how much it was going to take out of me. And so basically, like the first half of us dating, while we were going from apartment to apartment, I was just sleeping all day. And he didn't, yeah, he just stayed with me. So, and helped me through that and cooked a ton and did all the things that a supportive partner is supposed to do when you're trying to run your first marathon.

The support crew is key.

Yeah.

For sure. So, okay. So take us back to pre your running journey. You know, that's started about 25 for you. But before that, were you involved in sport at all growing up?

No, I tried cross-country, I think my sophomore year of high school and it didn't really stick. I just felt so out of my element that it wasn't something that I thought I was physically capable of doing. I actually had a really great cross-country coach, Coach Young, who I think about all the time still as I'm going back into this running journey. But yeah, so I dabbled in a little bit in high school, and then I think maybe my second or third year here in Austin, I had a roommate that wanted to run a half marathon, and so I was like, oh, this sounds like a really cool idea. The Austin half was our goal. I had done maybe a 5K at that point, and I basically was like, okay, I don't know where to start, but I know that I have to run a specific distance. So I think I had gone outside, ran up and down the block. I was living in West Austin at the time, and until I got to a mile, and that was how I got back into running. And that was maybe 2011, maybe? 2010, 2011.

Okay. Yeah. Quickly got to rewind on Coach Young. I always, I'm fascinated by coaches that have a lasting impact on us. I certainly have those from my history, and especially from soccer. But what do you remember from Coach Young? Like what's the lesson that sticks with you?

I mean, he was just, he was the, it's like if you pictured a cross-country coach, like t-shirt tucked in the really short shorts, always wearing Nikes, he would get on his bike around the area that I lived in, where the high school was, it was really hilly, and he would get on his bike and just ride next to us, and just either tell a story or make some joke about something to try to encourage and distract us from how awful it was running in August, September. And also that early in the morning, when you're 15 and 16, everything feels like it sucks. And so, yeah, I think that's what I remember the most about him, but he was also just really encouraging. He was also my health teacher. So we spent, I basically would go from my practice into that first class of the day. So I got out to spend a lot of time with him, but he's just like what I envisioned, like when every mentor looks like stereotypically, like, and I just always really appreciated that and thought it was really funny and cool. But yeah, he just really loved the sport and he really like was, I think, one of the people when I got into running, and I wanted to find more of an appreciation for what I was doing besides just running. I started to like watch track and field and like get into it in other ways, become a fan of the sport. I think that was like really like encouraged by him and kind of helps you get more excited about what you're doing rather than just running, because I don't think it is just running, but yeah.

Right. That's cool. Planted the seed for you.

Absolutely. Yeah.

Love that. So then fast forward, you get into a half on your own. At what point did you think about joining Rogue and why? What was the impetus there?

So I had planned for a marathon. So I had, you know, I did the half. I really liked it. Some of my like coworkers at the time were running, and so I was able to sort of stick with it to some degree, whether it was just like a fun run, 5K, 10K. There was like some sort of, you know, always something that I was like looking forward to. But I didn't think anything like outside of that. I didn't think anything more of it. When I joined Rogue, it was specifically to run a marathon. More specifically was to run the New York Marathon, and I had chosen that marathon because of a nonprofit that I still am very closely aligned with. It's like the Huntington's Disease Society of America. My mom was diagnosed with Huntington's in 2015. And so I was trying to find a way to do something that was more than just obviously supporting my parents and supporting my family, but to do something to contribute to what is a condition and a diagnosis. It's really like, it's an underserved community. There's not a lot of, it's unlike like Parkinson's and ALS. It has like a lot of, a lot of people know about it. A lot of people are able to speak to it. In the Huntington's community, it's not like that. Not a lot of people know about it. And so I was looking for nonprofits to run for, found Huntington's. They're actually based out of New York. And so it was like, okay, I'm going to run the New York Marathon. And that was when I made a decision. I was going to run a marathon specifically for this reason. And then I realized I didn't really know how to run a marathon. I think when you look at the distance of a marathon, it's just like this giant mountain. I don't know how to climb. And so I am very good at listening to instructions. I was, you know, my dad's in the military, so everything is very... I grew up in a pretty structured home. So I think I'm very good with listening to instructions. So I was like, I'm just going to sign up. And I had gone into the Rogue Running building at the time when I was looking for a pair of shoes, and Sarah actually recommended Rogue Running. And that's how I figured out what Rogue Running was. And she said, Chris is my coach right now. He's really analytical. So if that intimidates you, don't run with him. And I was like, oh, that seems good. And I met you and yeah, I think it clicked right away. And I just kind of put my head down and stuck with it. That's how I figured out Rogue. Yeah.

Yeah. Sarah made a buy. Yeah. She was working the retail floor at the time.

Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.

Pretty awesome. That takes me back. That takes me back. So you did New York with us. How did that first marathon go?

It was a lot of fun. It was everything that you want New York to be. It was, I remember you said, just focus on having fun. And I sort of didn't know what I was getting myself into, but I had a ton of fun that day. I think the biggest pressure, what I learned in retrospect, the biggest pressure was probably getting there. It's a nightmare and I don't know if I'll do the New York Marathon for a while because of that. But yeah, it was everything I wanted it to be. It was fun. The weather was good enough. I think it rained a little bit towards the end, but it was cool. The crowds were great. And it was just really freaking cool to finish that marathon. And I don't think that it's like no other. It's just the best.

Yeah. And you were a good student, I remember, in your first time with us. As you said, you're good at following directions, but you were definitely the one that was following all the rules, getting all the runs in, doing everything I said. And then as a result, you had a good experience in New York. What was your first marathon time there?

430. It was, I think, like 420, 430 and change. Yeah. So it's just like a really even pace. Like nothing felt too overwhelming. Obviously finishing Godhard, finishing that distance for the first time is definitely, you can feel it, but it was never something that I felt overwhelmed by that day.

Yeah. You were prepared. And you got bit by the buck.

Yeah. Yeah.

From there. Yeah. So, and I can't remember. I mean, it must have been at least a five year run or so where you were training pretty rigorously until about the pandemic. So, talk about that window of time and how things evolved for you.

Yeah. My next race after that was, I was building up to do San Antonio. And I think I was just focused on doing that next marathon. And so, I don't remember exactly if I had taken time off in between those two races. But yeah, so I started to, I feel like San Antonio was a learning lesson because I feel like I learned that I know what I needed to put in, but I was also cutting corners. I was like, I know exactly how much I need to run to just get this done. So, that second time around, I feel like I had more flexibility between running and then my personal life. And I was building up towards San Antonio, which no one wanted to tell me at the time, but the weather is pretty horrible there. I think everybody is just trying to spare me, and they shouldn't have. They should have told me to change my mind. But I wanted to do my hometown. And so after that, I remember actually getting in the car on my way home, and I was like, I'm never doing that again. That was a terrible day and a terrible idea. It was very hot and I didn't feel very well. So those are two lessons learned in that race. And I think we had gone for sub four hours, nothing too aggressive, but I ended up running it in 4.13 or something like that, right around that 4.10 mark. It was awful. It was like I definitely... I was prepared enough to run the distance. I don't think I was prepared enough to race the distance. And I think those are two different mindsets that I hadn't realized you have to have. Because you can do one or the other. There's no issue with that. It's just what do you want to focus on? And then I said, well, I never want to feel that horrible again. So I kind of put my head down after that point to focus for Chicago. I got in via lottery, which is very lucky. And so unlike San Antonio, I hear great things and great weather for Chicago. So it was October. I had finished San Antonio in December, and you and I kind of built a plan around getting as much running and getting as much racing in as possible. And so it was, I think, a 5K, a 10K, a half, and then Chicago. And yeah, Chicago ended up being really great. That cycle was honestly one of the most fun. And I think I was doing my strength training with Adrian and Reid and a bunch of people that I was running with pretty regularly. So we would go, and Caitlin, we would go from running strength training, and then I would see them evenings, weekends and stuff. And so it was just a really fun cycle. I was having a ton of fun with my friends with it. I was getting faster. I felt stronger. And I ended up, you and I sat down and said 345. And even on the day of, I think the weekend of, I think I remember texting you being like, are we sure about this? And you were like, if you don't focus on a 345, I'm gonna freak out. You probably didn't say that you would freak out on me, but I think that was your, okay, we were doing a 345. And I ended up knocking that out of the park. I ended up running a 330 in Chicago. Totally blew my mind. I finished and I was just in complete shock. I was like looking for Dan. It was just him and I that time for my race. And because I told them, I was like, I'm not gonna stop. So just meet me at the end. There's no highs, there's no like kisses and anything cute on the sideline. We're just gonna go for it, full send. And I'll see you at the end. And that's kind of, it just felt great. It was a great race, great day, great pores, great people. And I have like really great memories from doing that and feeling that way. And that was October 2019. We kind of planned to just repeat that cycle, say like 5k, 10k, half, and a full. And then the pandemic happened and that changed everything. I think the last place, it's funny because the last place that I was, that I had traveled to was the Olympic Trials Marathon. And that weekend, or that week, I think I come home and a couple of weeks later, we were all sent home from work and obviously never went back.

Yep, which threw a wrench in a lot of things, life, running, everything. And you went off and got married and then the running kind of took different forms, I think at different points during that period of time. So talk us through that window.

Yeah, I think the most changed at that point for me, I think I was on this, there was a lot of consistency in my life at that time. I was also, I was in grad school at the time. So there was a ton of structure in my life at the time. Like if I, you know, my schedule was like if I have to run, I have to get it in because then I have homework in the evenings. And, you know, I kind of like, there was a lot of just structure around it. There was also a lot of consistency with who I was running with and who I was hanging out with when the pandemic hit. A lot of people were, you know, friends were moving home because they weren't sure how long this was going to last. We were trying to stay pretty consistent with a group of people that we were like in our like pandemic bubble with that we had built at the time and just meeting to run or train or, you know, do a few as much as we could at that time. I think the only thing I'll miss about that is like the Austin streets were a lot quieter. So it was so much easier to run just pretty much anywhere. But Dan and I made the decision to start looking for a home, become first time homeowners. And so with that, we ended up making the decision to move to San Antonio to save some money. My parents were still out there at the time. This was, I think now, you know, early 2020, end of 2020. We moved and then my running stayed pretty, I mean, it was consistent to the degree that like, I was running alone, which is like huge. But I wasn't running like to train. I wasn't doing any strength training. I was just mainly like trying to get miles in when I could. And when I felt up for it, I think I lost a lot of motivation at that point. And in San Antonio is pretty spread out. So any of the running groups that I could have maybe joined were really far from where my parents lived. So I didn't even do that. And then we moved back to... We thought we were going to be in San Antonio for about six months, so we ended up being there for a year because it took so long to finish our home build with everything going on with the pandemic. And then we came back in 2021, December 2021. So it was about two years ish since my last marathon without any races on the books, without any build training or anything.

And then you came back to Rogue fairly soon after that, and then we had another little window of working together.

Yeah. I think after that point, I think I focused on doing maybe indie. I think that was the year that we were all going to indie and I wasn't fully committed to doing a marathon yet at that point. And so I planned for a half. Did the half in indie. It went okay. I think like I put together a decent training, but I wasn't, my motivation wasn't entirely like, I wasn't like digging in and really doing like everything that I needed to do. I think a lot shifted as far as like I was doing my strength training alone. That was pretty boring. I was obviously coming to Wednesday mornings, but my most of my runs, like that my all the supplemental runs that you're doing around that. I was still doing it by myself. And so I was still trying to get back into community and routine. And I think that wasn't aligning for me entirely. So while I did the half, I feel like there was still more that I could have done there. Like I left, I definitely like left feeling like I could have been a little bit stronger during that race. It was also raining, so my...

Raining, windy, crazy winds, 20-mile-an-hour headwinds.

Yeah, super weird. I followed that up with 3M just as a training run. That was pretty fun, actually. It was local, so I think I felt excited to see people on the sidelines cheering us on.

Another half, another half here for those that don't know.

Yeah. What is it now? The Austin half?

Austin International half, yeah.

I saw that the other day and I genuinely was like, is this a new race? Because I didn't realize I changed the name of it.

Kind of a random name, but yeah, that's new. Okay. So, and then you had a speed track, I believe, after that. If I'm not mistaken.

Yeah. I think I was trying to call together a training plan for CIM, I think. That didn't come together. Yeah. These get a little bit easier to go through or to explain because I feel like I was just not in the headspace. I was partially there. I was partially going through fertility. I was freezing my eggs, creating embryos with Dan, and then didn't really come back after I did the egg retrieval, I think, and then tried to come back again this year for Houston. And halfway through Houston, I think I got injured. Or was it? Yeah. Or something like that.

Well, then you also had your mom, I think, helping out with her. So a lot of variables getting thrown at you.

So many. Yeah. Yeah. Being a caretaker is a, yeah, it's just, it's a learning opportunity. I've, you know, we, I grew up in a multi-generational home. I grew up with my grandparents living with me, and my grandpa had the same condition as mom. But, you know, we were kids at the time, and you didn't know what you don't know. And yeah, it was just a huge, huge, a bunch of change. So, you know, it was not just getting my parents here to Austin, but now they'll be living with us here soon as well. So it's just a lot of change in such a short period of time. And so my energy felt that I needed to like get through all these things that were stressing me out and then coming back to running and saying, I think I know what it takes to race well for myself. And I kind of already because I know what that path looks like, it feels like a massive hurdle every time I try to start over. And so I get stuck feeling overwhelmed by what I know that I need to do or what it takes to, to sort of put all of that together and be that version of myself, which in your 20s is much easier than when life starts, you know, starts.

Yeah. I mean, it's interesting as a coach, I get to see this a lot where I have these trajectories with people and life has its seasons, right? And some of those seasons give you more space for running and training and setting big goals and going to get them. And some give you less space. And it's OK that that ebbs and flows. It's always there for you when you want it to be, but you shouldn't try to force it when you have to prioritize elsewhere for whatever reason. Getting married, moving, helping take care of your mom, going through the fertility things you've been going through, all of those things are life seasonal things that are going to impact your training. And it's OK. You know, it's OK. And I can remember when you were going through the egg retrieval process, you know, the things you're having to take to get ready for that. And that was messing with you. And so just speak to that briefly, to the extent that you're willing. I know that that's something, whether it be that specifically or somebody trying to do in vitro or whatever it may be, or taking medication to increase their chances or whatever it may be, that's a part of the journey for women that men just don't have to face.

Yeah, yeah, I definitely, you know, in any way that, you know, families and couples go about having a kid, there is definitely the way that you're planning for it. I remember I was, I think I was on a run and somebody was like, yeah, my wife, she's eight months pregnant, just almost there, so on and so forth. This guy's just like cruising on this run. I was like, man, like his like, how like, as his kid's being born, like how lucky and fortunate he gets to still be on this like journey. And I felt that was like really interesting perspective. But yeah, going back to my fertility and sort of trying to balance it in everything else that I was trying to do at that time. It was tough. I mean, medication, once you're on medication for IVF, at that point, you're really not really moving in general, not just because you're tired, but because of what the changes that it does, like that it has on you internally. And so there was always this like concern that taking time away from the sport was impacting my goals and all these big things that I was dreaming about. And I was trying to just like get every doctor's appointment in, which is like, I don't know, it's like one a week and then it increases like multiple times a week. And there's blood draws and making sure that Dan and I are both doing all of the testing that we need to do and primarily, this we felt was like the safest path that both giving us time and giving us the ability to say that like our eggs are healthy, my eggs are healthy. But it's really hard, I think, to get to your 30s, especially given that my generation tends to start thinking about family planning at this time and not feel selfish for taking this time away from this thing that you're trying to do, which is like start a family, but also be good at this thing that we're so fortunate to have as adults because you walk away from high school and college and those sports are done, but you still get this really great opportunity to go accomplish really cool things in your adult life. And it's a lot of fun and being a part of the community is a lot of fun. But then when you get to that point where you have to make a decision between taking time away and doing your best athletically, it feels selfish to think about doing your best athletically. And so I struggled with that quite a bit. Because all I wanted to do was like, if I have any ounce of me that can still accomplish this goal of qualifying for Boston, then I have to take it now. And it just felt like now, now, now. But I was burning myself out because I was like, I have to stick to all my goals. I have to go into the gym. I have to be strength training. And I just felt like I was burning myself out because I was trying to rush the process, which if you've ever been coached by Chris McClung, you know that rushing the process is not a part of the process and the journey that you should be on. And I felt like I was getting months and years away from my 2019 fitness, that if I got any further, I would just be like dead in the water for lack of a better term. And that was really hard for me to, and then I just got overwhelmed and I was like, I need to give up. I don't know what I'm doing.

Plus you throw in to the fact that you feel weird in your body, you know, taking those medications and hormones and all the things associated with that. It's, you don't feel normal, you know, if that's a thing. And then you're also fighting this internal drive that you want us to hold on to those aspirations and this is somehow a way of letting them go.

Yes, yeah. And it was like, I think, I did all of, I slept, I cried, and I ate a lot of like, fruit and then salty foods. And that was like what I went through. So all of those things are okay. Crying is definitely okay during this process. I think I was on the phone at like 9 a.m. with my parents crying about like, absolutely nothing. And they were just like, sure, sure, sure. This is great. Keep talking about this. Super supportive. But yeah, and then yeah, also just, yeah, trying to just be and I think with my mom's diagnosis, I just feel like I have to get everything out of myself that I can because should knock on wood this happened to me. I want to know that I used my body in a way that was like, I pursued all the things that I wanted to pursue and I got the most out of myself that I possibly could. And so I really feel that pressure to have a family to get the most out of myself. And then also just be present in my life or my relationship for my parents, for my brother. And that all kind of is always where my mind is sort of stuck is I get very overwhelmed by that thinking about that and thinking that I'm losing out on something.

Sure. A very normal feeling and one that I see especially women face when it comes to the questions about having a family and how that fits with the running goals. And I often have conversations where people are feeling like they have to rush things in order to get to a certain standard before they start doing whatever it may be from a fertility journey standpoint. And that I understand that feeling, and it's a normal feeling. But I also get to see the other side of it, which is there are a lot of people that go through those experiences, have kids, come back, usually stronger because mom power is a real thing and still have an amazing runway in the sport that can be really, really long. Regardless of really the age at which you're talking about this happening. And so that to me is the encouraging part. And it's okay to put a pause on goal chasing while you're pursuing other priorities. And again, that could be starting a family. It could be anything. It could be a career priority. It could be anything that someone needs to go do in order to chase goals that might be apart from running and putting a pause on your journey is fine. You're going to be able to come back to it. It's going to be there. You're going to be stronger and maybe even more prepared to go get those goals down the road. But it's hard to think about that when you're in it.

Yeah, definitely. Yeah, pausing on goals, I think it's the fitness really that comes to mind. It's like, will I still be or it's the motivation? Will I still be able to want this in the same way? I think it's definitely not like I was thinking in the last couple of years. I said, well, at least in 34 going on 35, Boston goal times changed, but they didn't. So that's still something to reach and accomplish and to go after that set 330. But really it's, you know, the further I move away from my time in my 20s and my racing in my 20s, I wonder how easy it is to come back.

It's gonna be there. It's gonna be there. Because you still haven't tapped all of your potential. And I remember when, you know, the last period of time that we worked together thinking about Indy, 3M, I think you did Sunshine Run or something that that spring and, and then started taking some of the medication over the summer that that disrupted things in that progress. But you were in such a strong place, even though at that time, even you weren't as able, you weren't able to be as consistent as you would have liked to have been even in that window of time, you were at such a strong place. And every time we would test your fitness, it would be there. And it may only show up in workouts, but it was there. And I know you're going to be able to tap into that. And the question is how and why and what does it look like and what's the timeline for it? But it's absolutely still in front of you. That's the first thing to internalize is that everything you want is still in front of you. Your fastest marathon still in front of you, 100%.

Yeah, I think I think also another another nice thing about the Austin running community is you do have people and we can certainly call out Wendy for just how positively she looks at like jumping back into things. And I'm always inspired and motivated by that. And I think it's definitely I'm starting to feel like my engine is starting to feel like it's like warming up now that I'm putting miles back under my feet. But yeah, what does like if I set a goal this year to run a marathon, what does that look like? What does my times look like? And does it have to do we have to like put as much pressure on what that this next marathon looks like?

We don't have to put any pressure on it. I mean, I would encourage you not to. But I do think the first real question kind of looking ahead is what do you want? Right? What do you want? And we can talk about this in whatever order you want. You've talked about Boston. So there's a question of what do you want from a running standpoint? And then there's a question of what do you want from a life standpoint? Where are you in that family building journey with Dan? And how does that dovetail into all of this? Because obviously we can't, we can't chase two rabbits at once. We have to still prioritize those things in a way that makes sense, right? It all has to fit together. So tell us a little bit about where you are now, about what you want in life and in running.

Yeah, thanks. So I think it's, I mean, you know, stereotypically, yeah, I want to do it all, if it's all possible. Sure, let's go for that. But no, realistically, I think that there would be some flexibility in my schedule, like today, right now, in maybe the next three, four, five weeks, I could foresee like, yeah, I can get six runs in a week. Like my schedule right now looks good. In a month from now, that might change. And so how do I allow a schedule to like, typically what I've done and historically, maybe this is why I tend to get overwhelmed. Historically, like when we put a schedule in front of us, it's like you stick to it as best as possible, but you know the runs in that you're going to get per week. You know the mileage you're going to get in per week. Strength training impossible, you'll get in per week. But if a month from now, I have to say, you know what, I can't do six runs a week. Maybe I can do four runs a week. Does that negatively impact me or is it just like a matter of just pursuing that? Because I think like that's sort of the flexibility that I historically haven't asked for because I haven't needed it. And so when I try to jump back in and get into the rhythm, I'm like, oh my god, I'm going to have to stick to this schedule and it's like, I'm going to fail at it. And then I, yeah, the fear of failure, yeah.

Well, in that sense, as it relates to starting back, I think the goal is would be to set the bar at a place that's doable and that's relatively sustainable into the foreseeable future. And then you have to know, what are your pressure release valves? You know, where can I pull back in the least impactful way when things get intense, you know, in a given period of time? But I think part of the challenge that you're running up against is that you know what, quote, perfection looks like in terms of a routine with your schedule where all systems are firing, right? But you're not going to be able to do that at the place you are in life. And so we have to figure out what the new version of that looks like, that we can claim as absolute success. Not that you have to do it perfectly, but that the average week for Nicole is going to allow you to be able to execute with success most of the time. And then again, know where you can make your adjustments. And then you do your best because I think part of this is we've got to build momentum for you again. You've lost that momentum and that inertia. And I feel this when I'm out of that routine. When you're out of the routine and when you think about what it takes to get back into the routine, it feels like a mountain you can't climb.

Yeah.

But then when you get to halfway up the mountain, you're like, oh, OK, I remember what this is like. I can do this. And suddenly, a 10-mile run feels like no big deal again when right now it may feel like the longest thing ever. And so we've got to just get the ball rolling and get momentum, which is then going to allow you to see the light at the end of the tunnel, to dream again, to get that sustainability going. But we've got to set it up in a way that fits the parameters of your life so that 90% of the weeks, you're going to be able to have success. Yeah.

Yeah, I definitely think that that's where I'm at, just because I don't think that we're so certain about exactly what month and what time period we would start trying or exactly what month my parents are going to be able to sell their house in order to get them moved in. And so there's these things that I know I'm looking at, but there's no definite timelines and there's flexibility there. But then suddenly, I might be consumed by something. Yeah, I just want to make sure that no schedule is 100 percent. I'm not always hitting every run, but something that is a little bit different. It's just shaped differently than I think that I've done previously. It makes me feel like, yeah, I'm still moving forward and getting momentum and feeling that speed again. Because the nice thing is like Wednesdays are just one day of the week, but it's then everything else that's like, I think a little bit harder sometimes for me because I am out there by myself sometimes and the motivation.

Right. Right. Well, let me ask you a couple of things and then we can drill into tactics. First of all, and I think last week's episode where I talked about staying present, is kind of a theme here to latch on to and maybe go back and re-listen to that one. But I always want you to dream, to keep the big dreams alive. Don't lose sight of the big dreams. And it's okay if those evolve or shift to your purpose for them wanting them evolves over time. That's okay, but don't stop dreaming. And then you got to get back to the present. Like, what, okay, what do I need to do now to take the next step forward? And so let's put that into practice a little bit because I think there's two sides of dreaming that I want you to consider. One is the big true north, regardless of timeline, what do you want? You talked about Boston, but if you think about your running goals, again, taking out timeline, and assuming that you have everything in front of you, is that the biggest dream you have is to get to Boston?

I think that it, I mean, as far as from like a, how do I put this? I think as far as being the fastest, I think I always just want to assume that I can max out at whatever time that is in the marathon. And so I do want to keep getting faster. I know where I was at relative to like my, to Chicago. And so I know like where I could have pushed it a little bit more. And so that's always exciting for me. But really, even after Boston, it's like really longevity. Like I really want to come back to the place where running feels like this central, like the sport that I pour myself into. And whether that's Boston or marathons or ultras or whatever else I do, I want this to be the place where I feel like most, like this is a sport that I chose for my adult life and that I'm putting my energy into. And so obviously because of the pandemic, I feel like I lost a little bit of that and I lost that sort of love for it. And so that's where I'm trying to come back to is like really just making sure that I see this through and I continue to do this for as long as I can.

Okay. Well, you haven't lost your love for it.

Thanks.

I know that for sure. Because we wouldn't be talking if you had, right? You wouldn't have wanted to have this conversation if you had lost your love for it.

That's true. Yeah.

Right. So it's very much alive in you. But the tension that you're fighting is this tension between does that love have to include striving at the same time?

Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.

Right. And, you know, and there's a mindset that I understand, and I actually am very much living with myself today of if I'm not going for goals, does that mean I don't love it enough or it's...

Yeah.

It's not the right thing for me. And so then that creates this tension where like, well, I guess my love isn't strong enough or my will isn't strong enough or whatever it may be. And that's just the devil on our shoulder, telling us things that are going to get us to do less. And so, you know, there's a duality of it that I think is okay to recognize and admit. The duality of pursuing this sport. Yes, we do it because we want to maybe for longevity, for stress relief, for balance, to give us an outlet to process the world. Maybe to connect with people, right? There's a part of it that has nothing to do with performance. And then there's a part of it that does, that you want to get faster. You know, you mentioned Boston. I didn't bring it up because that's still something about that is a motivator that is alive and well in you. And it would be disingenuous to say, you don't want to get faster.

Yeah.

And just be, you would be disingenuous to say, I don't want to get faster. I just want to love running and do it forever. Yeah. That's not where you are. And it's by the way, okay, if that's where you are, if somebody listening is there.

No, no, yeah. I think it's-

But I find that most people don't engage coaches. They don't talk about Boston. They don't talk about even dissatisfaction with the pursuit of this, you know, because the priorities are different relative to performance. So that's the part that you're struggling to reconcile.

Yeah, 100 percent.

Right? And it's okay to have both things, to want both things, and then to at times prioritize one or the other. And I think so, stepping away from that, I still want to get to a crisper picture of what performance looks like to you. Because we're not having this conversation because you just want to do this forever. I recognize that that's part of your journey, and I want it to be a part of your journey. And we're going to come back to how do we make that a sustainable part of your journey while balancing the other part. But from a performance standpoint, what do you want?

Well, I'd like to... I think my goal in the marathon is to race a 320. I think that that's something that I know that is within me. In the marathon, I dream of getting a 140. I think like the last two halves, or I'm sorry, the last two half marathons that I've done, and it's definitely not shown my best self. I think I've shown up just enough to that race, to those races. And those are, those, you know, if we're looking at it as like time goals, you know, that's what I hope for, and I think that's what I have in me. I feel like I can get back to that fitness, but does it require like who I was before? Like does it require that version of myself? And I don't know what the answer to that is. And that's where I think I get a little bit stuck because I have these like big goals, obviously, to, you know, PR in the marathon from Chicago, but it's just hard to sort of reconcile those that with like where I am now with my time constraints and like my other priorities.

Sure.

And that's where I back off. I tend to back off because I say, oh, if I can't like do it all, then should I do it at all? And that's where I think a little bit of that comes from.

320, and you said, wait, 140? That can't be right because that's two 140s is 320.

I ran a 145 in, or here, I guess, and well, Indy was weird. Indy was just a weird race because also the course was.

I'm just saying, if you run 320, you got to run two 140s in that race to get. So a standalone half, you're going to be able to do faster if you can run 320.

You think so?

Of course.

That would be, I don't, I mean, I hope, I mean, always, I hope so.

I mean, 145 times two is 330. 140 times two is 320.

Yeah.

So you'd really be looking at like a 135 potentially in the half. And if you're able to run a 320 marathon, then you'd probably be closer to 135 or under for the half. But that's neither here nor there.

Yeah.

So, but I like that number to have in your head because, look, I want you to keep that dream alive. And it's not about thinking I have to be my old self. It's not about that at all. It's actually about saying, I have to be who I am, carrying with me everything I've learned. So you're going to be able to be stronger as the older version of you than you were in 2019 when you were in Chicago because of everything you've been through to get to this point. And the consistent, and maybe it hasn't always been perfect, but the consistent even maintenance training that you've been doing between then and now, because that's all aerobic foundation building that carries with you, that makes you ultimately in a stronger position now than you were back then, especially once we can get back to higher-volume training and all of that. So yeah, keep that dream alive, 100%. And then the duality part is also appreciating and recognizing when there are moments when you can't train specifically for something or when performance needs to be de-prioritized, that you love and appreciate running for what it is in those moments as well.

Yeah, I think that I was like this last training cycle that I fell off, I think maybe for Houston or for CIM, I think I was coming into every workout, every speed workout, quality day, thinking that I needed to do the most because if I was at that max capacity for myself, then that would be like sort of the breadcrumbs that would amount to like this big achieving this PR or whatever it was at the end. I think my mindset going back to Rogue here soon is hopefully that I just start doing quality days to get that work in and to get that under my legs rather than thinking that I need to be at a certain place now today. And that was just growth from trying to sort of get myself out of the mindset of being, like you said, I think like going back to that old self and comparing myself to that previous version of myself and where I was at then. Yeah, I think that that's like, that's what I'm hoping to do is I like come back to quality days is just take it as a workout. Doesn't have to be the best workout. It just has to be getting it done and finishing.

Yeah, a couple of thoughts. One is, I think you're in a window of time when you need to keep the dream alive and allow yourself to periodically go to that space of dreaming what 320 could look like and what that means to you and what that represents in your journey. But then you have to kind of forget about it and let it go. And then come back to what's going to serve you from a goal standpoint now, which is more about honestly process. It's like, what can I achieve from a process standpoint to get the momentum going that will help me build into something that might be more, that will help me understand what space I have in my life right now, given all the other variables that play and kind of have to let it go. And when we let it go, sometimes then it comes back to us. But if you hang on to it too tightly right now, it's just going to be de-motivating, because you're going to be like, there's no way I can get there now.

Yeah.

That's not serving you. So while you want to keep the dream alive, you also have to let it go or at least hold it loosely right now so that we can reestablish momentum.

Yeah. I think because I got there, it sticks with me more now than it did when I first started training with Rogue, because I just didn't know what I was capable of. So I was like, I'm going to show up. I'm going to do this thing that I said that I was going to do. A, because I signed up for the marathon. B, because I don't know what my potential is, and I was just going out there and doing my best and running with my friends, and getting into the spirit of all of that. And I think now that I know that that is possible, I think that that's what I'm afraid of. I'm like, oh my gosh, it took me so long to get there. It felt like it did.

Right, which brings up the second point, which is you got to let go of the past too.

Yeah.

You got to let go of the blueprint that worked then.

Yeah.

Because that is never going to be re-created. And that doesn't mean, that's not a bad thing. That's not a bad thing at all. It's just you got to let go of that blueprint because it's your comparison point that's demotivating. Like, well, if I can't ever be that, then I'll never be what I want to be. But that thing's not coming back. That version of your training isn't coming back. And that doesn't mean you can't get the goal. It just means that life is in a different place now.

Yeah, yeah.

And so we've got to evolve to where we are now. And anchoring yourself on the past isn't hopeful.

Yeah, that's definitely. And it's so strange, because this is the only time in my entire adult life that I compare myself to my 20s outside of that. I'm like, now I'm much more, like, I'm a little bit older than my husband. And I like my life. But yeah, that's the only point of comparison that I think that I keep coming back to. But also, yeah, just like, you know, yeah.

That comparison is not serving you. So we gotta let it go. It's okay to have it pop in your brain, but acknowledge it and then set it aside. So that's not productive. And then the third point here is you gotta train where you are to get where you wanna go. You know, we always wanna fast forward to in it and fully hitting the paces we used to hit and fully hitting the volume we used to hit. We always wanna fast forward to that point, but we can't. We have to focus on where we are, be present in where we are, take what our body gives us right now, so that we can establish that consistency and momentum around that, which we'll eventually build. And there will be a time, or there will be this initial period where it's gonna feel really frustrating and maybe painful and, you know, rebuilding fitness sucks as a runner. It just does. It might be four to six weeks before you realize, okay, this is starts to get easy again. But then there will be a point at which you turn that page, you turn a corner, you see the light at the end of the tunnel, you're like, okay, now I can at least see the possibility of getting where I want to go. But it's gonna take some time to get there. And we just need to focus on where are you now? Realistically, what does your life allow? Given the constraints around work and family and everything else. And let's establish a process that we can sustain that you can hit 90% of the time and then know where our safety valves are if we need them.

Yes, I agree with all that.

Because the other thing is we also got to get you re-embedded in the community. There are new faces that you'll love and embrace. And there are old ones too, that will love you and embrace you again. But they'll also help you through this, right?

Yeah.

You're not alone. You've got me, you've got a team. You don't have to do this alone. You've got people that have been through similar things and challenges, right? That will embrace you. So reconnecting with that, I think will also be a helpful part of this.

Yeah. No, I definitely like I've had a build back this past January that has me like coming back to Rogue in just a few weeks. I think I'm like two and a half weeks away from that. Yeah, I was trying to get back to just from minutes to mileage. That's kind of been my transition. And so my long run this week is six miles. And then in a couple of weeks, I think like my seventh week in all of this, so mid February, I guess, I have it written down to come back to Rogue.

Nice. So what does it look like now? What does your routine look like right now?

So right now, I'm running six days. I'm off on Friday. For the number of years we've been working together, I'm like, oh, I can build a plan now. I have enough skill set to write some numbers down. That makes sense. But yeah, so I think this week, I started with my medium long run at five miles, and then all my recoveries have been three miles and then 30 minutes. So I'm phasing out the minutes this week, and then next week, I'll have mileage every day, which is like six, three, four, and then my long run will be seven next week. The following week that I go back to Rogue, I started my medium long run at seven, and then my long run at eight with three mile recoveries every day, except for Friday. Okay. And like right in this month, in this time period, I can manage six days. Like I can get out just fine, whether it's before or after work. I'm able to get out and get that mileage done. Right now, it's in the evenings just because I am running by myself. So the sun just sets too late in the mornings for me to like, get out there by myself. And then I have this really long build back period where I'm like, still looking at six days, but I want to get to 10 at Monday and then like cap at my medium long run at 10 miles. I think those days were the best days. What I'd like the most flexibility around is like, oscillating between six days of running and like five days of running. If I need to like, which I know, I mean, it's like, that sounds like a lot, but it doesn't feel like a lot. Like if I, because I'm used to the six day schedules. So, you know, if need be, I can run five days a week, have that Tuesday off. And if I need to do anything or if I need to, you know, not focus my energy on like another run back to back, then I can feel not bad about it.

I mean, all of those aspirations sound great and certainly in line with, you know, the fundamentals of what we do. It does sound like a lot, just first pass. And so, and that doesn't mean that we have to pull back, but I would just say, definitely know where your pressure release valves are, right? Which are, in my mind, you know, a couple of runs, a couple of miles, excuse me, on your medium long run. So if you needed to pull back, if you were doing eight miles consistently on Monday, that would make me really happy. I love the aspiration of 10, but if you can get back to eight and hit that 80% of the time, that's going to be really formative. That's good to know. So, you know, do you aspire for 10? I'm okay with you aspiring for 10, but as you get into it, if you get to eight and you're like, oh, that feels like the right amount in terms of what I have to work with time-wise, and that's where you stay, that's cool. Okay. Or if you get to 10 and then you need to pull back sometimes eight, that to me would be a pressure release valve to pull. Another would be one of those days. So if you're running three miles Tuesday, Thursday, Sunday, obviously I want to keep one of those three milers between Wednesday and Saturday, but you can flex Thursday, Friday potentially. And then obviously Sunday is important after the long run. But if you need to pull off Tuesday, then that's okay. Or if you need to move Thursday to Friday, that's okay. So there's some flexibility there. And maybe you find that five days is all that sustainable right now. That to me is a picture of success in the window of time that you are in. And I would rather you set a slightly lower bar and then exceed it than set a higher bar and not meet it and feel like you're not having success. Because especially given your history, you're going to get a lot out of five days in an eight mile medium long run. And if we can get that long run up to where I know you would want it to be north of 10, then you're going to get a lot of bang for your buck on that. And is it perfect? No, but we don't need perfect.

Yeah.

Perfect is the enemy of good in this case.

When you look at building back to schedule, they typically align with an end race. Is that should that be my focus in this build back or should I just be focused on running, like just getting those miles in, getting the quality days back in, or is it... I know it's always good, it's good to have a race in mind, but is that also just doubling down on making sure that I'm trying to have this perfect training plan that follows with this A race?

Yeah, I mean, look, I think a race can be a great thing. Sometimes people need it to motivate, but in this case, I think it might create pressure. That's not helpful. So I don't know that you necessarily need to have a race. If I were you, I'd be focused on goals around process, reestablishing routine, feeling good while doing it, feeling like it's sustainable, reminding yourself that that's good enough and that that's a picture of success too. And then and not forcing a race goal, but letting, you know, letting things marinate and percolate so that when something does pop up, we're like, this would be an exciting thing to have a goal around. We can jump on it, but I wouldn't force that.

Okay. Yeah, I think that's good too.

I would go to all in process.

Yeah. I think I was also, you know, I think the combined pressure of like ramping back up, when I was ramping back up the two previous times, and knowing there's like this thing at the end and everything has to like go as well as possible around it, was overwhelming. And so I would step back. And then if I stepped back, then I would just completely step back and not do anything at all.

If it's going to serve you, then it's great to have a goal. But if it's not going to serve you, then we shouldn't. In this case, I don't think that makes sense because what's more important than any race we could pick is that we can reestablish momentum.

Yeah.

And maybe even more than that, get you enjoying the activity of running again in a way that lights a fire that eventually brings us back to that place of striving again.

Yeah, that would be great. I think that's... And you know, what's amazing is we're heading into the best time of year to be running in Austin, which is summer. So I think that will be difficult enough. So I think that will be kind of like racing. It's going to be really humid and hot all the time. And yeah, even on Mondays, just having like Barton Springs as an end goal sometimes is good enough for me. Right. Just being able to jump in and say, okay, I did it. Yeah.

And the other thing I would say relative to speed when you do come back is, is to keep that super mellow in a sense that, you know, we can talk at some point about specific paces, you know, when you get there, but it should be very sustainable. You should ease back in in a way where you finish those workouts feeling like, okay, I worked, but I don't feel overworked or I don't feel like I'm pressing the edges too much. We want to ease back in that way so that it keeps you healthy, sustainable, makes you feel like you're having success versus, you know, getting beat up by the workouts. And then we'll build from there. We'll see how it goes and see how it evolves. I think it'll take a little bit of time, but I think before you know it, you'll be surprising yourself. And, you know, and then we can kind of go from there. But you need to be in the place of just being very present. You know, what do I need to do today to take that next step in kind of rebuilding momentum? And if you can do that and keep putting together good days and good weeks, then we'll get where we want to go. And then when life allows us to strive and dream and expand what you're doing in that routine, then we will. I would also say I would not worry about the strength right now.

Okay.

I'm giving you permission to not worry about it. It's important, yes, but in the context of everything else that you're balancing and just re-establishing the running momentum, I don't think that's helpful to layer that in as well at this point. So I would let it go for now. We can bring it back once we've established that running routine again.

Okay. Yeah, I haven't like I've been doing a little bit. Obviously, my work has a gym, so that's always my default. And I did Pilates this morning, which I did not run this morning at all. But yeah, so I'm trying to just figure out flexibility around my schedule. Honestly, if I can take Tuesdays off, that would be really nice. And then, yeah, either recover Thursday or Friday.

Yeah, I'm going to take it off. I would set that as your bar. Five days, eight mile medium long run. Would love to get you up to, let's just say like 12 on the long run, you know, as a fairly near term goal. Three miles on the other days, Thursday or Friday, and then Sunday. And let's establish routine around that. If it's easy to fit in a class like Pilates, and you've got that access to that easily, throw it in, sure, as long as it's not adding pressure to the overall equation, because that certainly is a great way to get, especially core strength. But I wouldn't, I don't think that has to be something you worry about too much right now.

Cool. That's good. This is good. This makes you feel a lot better.

This is really good.

Yeah.

And then the other thing I want you to just consider is, and you know I'm big on affirmations, I think you need something here to remind yourself, when you do have the demon that jumps on your shoulder, the devil on your shoulder that says you're not doing enough, or you'll never do this again, or you'll never be as fast as you want to be, like that devil isn't going away. He's going to hop on your shoulder, occasionally, and that's normal human stuff. And you're going to hear that, but I want you to be able to observe that that isn't real. Recognize it. Don't beat yourself up over having those thoughts. And then shift to something positive by having some sort of affirmation that reminds you of what you're trying to do right now, which is build a routine, establish a momentum, enjoy the process. Like, that's your focus right now, because if we can do that stuff, the other things will come. So just think about what you can kind of tell yourself as that way to shift the brain to positive thinking when those doubts come.

Yeah, I think that's exactly. Yeah. I was like, if you do have something written down you want to share with the class, that would be great too. Yeah, I think I definitely need to find something that is a little bit, yeah, just not putting myself down. I had a friend the other day, a wise tech center on Tuesday, and I said, man, I really don't want to run. She goes, you know what I've learned? She goes, I thought this running journey for me, which she's doing her first half this year, she was going to be really physical, but I realized 90% of the battle is mental and actually just getting out the door. And which motivated me to go and got me going that day for my run, which was really nice. But yeah, sort of having that sort of accountability through the community and through my friends again, I think would also be really nice too. Because everybody wakes up at 530 in the morning on Wednesdays.

And I just thought of a potential affirmation for you that reflects, as I reflect on the conversation, something along the lines of there's peace in the process. Because I think that for you is you need to be reminded that there's peace in the journey for you because you enjoy it and it's a part of balance in your life. But there's also peace for you in the longer term picture around performance by just being able to focus on gaining momentum in the process now. So you can have both the peace and balance you want with running, but also the peace of mind that you're going to get to those bigger goals at some point if you can just nail the process now. So throwing that out there. But it's, you know, when the devil is on your shoulder telling you those things that are making you question it at all, remind yourself, there's peace in the process. What do I need to do now? The next step, what do I need to do today to take that next step in the process?

Okay. Yeah, I think that this was a good motivator for me to get outside of myself for a minute. And it was also just really fun reminding myself of how long it's been. Yeah. So wild.

Right? In a good way. I talked about it on my episode a few ago about the sort of superhero aspect of this and everybody has an origin story. And that's a part of yours. And we can look back on it and beat ourselves up and say, we'll never be where we are. Or we can say, no, I'm here now. I am who I am because of that journey. And I'm going to be stronger for it down the road because of that journey. So embrace the power of it and not, you know, don't use it to bring you down.

Yeah, thanks. Yeah, it is. It is very cool. Yeah, I did listen to that. I was like, you know, when we do start a family, it'll be very cool to be able to tell this story to our kids and just being able to think back on all the really cool stuff that I got to do. Yeah, I think, you know, the city and Austin itself and Rogue is just very fortunate, very, very lucky to have found this community.

Well, we're lucky to have you in it. And also remember when you do have kids, you're going to have guilt then about chasing your dreams. It'll look a little bit different.

So what you're saying is it never stops.

It never stops, it evolves.

Yeah.

But I can promise you as a parent myself and as someone who coaches a lot of parents, individual striving is so, so critical to showing up as your best self as a parent. So don't lose that.

Yeah. Yeah.

Ever.

Very true.

I'm excited to reconnect, excited that you're going to be back soon.

Me too.

I'm glad we can sort through some of these things today.

Yeah. I'm excited to be back too. I'm excited this tiny cold snap I haven't had to wake up for. And I'm just looking forward to warmer weather, running in the weather, at least like the March through May weather and then we'll see. Right.

I think all of us are. It's funny how much we complain about the summer heat, but then we complain more when it's 25 degrees.

Yeah. I have all of one jacket to last me an entire winter, which doesn't last very long, but constantly washing it, because I am like, this weather, this morning, I'm not ready for it. Yeah, I'm excited for the warmer temps.

I love it. Well, thanks, Nicole, for being willing to share your story and opening up really awesome to reconnect. I know there will be many who can relate to this story, and I'm excited to see you here in a few weeks at Rogue.

Thanks. Thanks, Chris. Really appreciate it.

All right, everybody, we'll wrap it here. As always, you can check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Instagram or Facebook at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.