Hey, everybody, welcome to episode 365 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung, coming to you from Austin, Texas. And I'm going to bring you a topic that was inspired by a listener email. We're going to be talking about staying present in your training and with your racing, staying present in your training and with your racing. So easy to get out of ourselves. It's so easy to think about what's next or worry about what's coming or how you're going to respond to X, Y, and Z. It's really hard to stay in the moment, to make sure that you're doing what you need to do in each moment and each day in order to take that next logical step. We're going to tee that up as a conversation today to talk about how do I stay present in training and in races? And we're going to tee up the conversation with a listener email. Cecilia from Florida sent me a message last week and she had a question about dealing with injury that inspired this topic. I've also had a few other conversations with athletes that inspired this topic for today. But here is the email from Cecilia. Cecilia said, I'm a big fan of your podcast. I'm planning to run the St. Petersburg Marathon in two weeks, February 9th, and I'm struggling with what to do. I have some sort of injury which I've never experienced before on the right side of my leg. I have an appointment with the physical therapist next week. I made it up to my longest run of 22 miles and felt strong for that. If I'm unable to run the mileage I am supposed to these next two weeks, do you think I'm still able to run this marathon? Should I prioritize rest, cross training, or trying to get as much running as I can if it feels okay? This will be my third marathon and I've never had an injury before. I would really appreciate any advice you can give me as well as a realistic perspective of if this marathon is possible. So that's the question from Cecilia. First of all, in responding to Cecilia, which I already gave her a quick recap of what I'm going to say via email. First I wanted to say, sorry that you're having an injury situation. I've certainly dealt with that myself. I've gotten sick right before a big race where the question was, should I even toe the line? I've also had injuries where I've had to step back and not actually toe the line. I've kind of lived on both sides of this experience and certainly coached on both sides of it. Sounds like she's gotten a lot of good work in training, which is great. And that's the most important headline here. And then the next question is, can she get to the start line healthy? In answering this question, I want to first remind her and people that might be in that situation is that once you get to two weeks out from a marathon, the hard work is done. The hay is in the barn, as the great Bill Bowerman once said. So you can't build fitness really at this point in the game. And really 10 weeks, sorry, 10 days out from race day is the point at which you can no longer actually build race specific fitness. And typically, once we get into the marathon taper mode, we're no longer trying to build fitness. We're rather maintaining fitness and trying to make sure that we're fresh and sharp for that starting line, which is why we pull back on volume and intensity during that taper phase. So if you're within two weeks, then the hard work is done. The hay is in the barn, as I said, and now the goal is just to get to that start line as healthy as you can. Really these last two weeks are about keeping the body sharp, making sure the brain and the body are physically ready to go, so that you are able to put your best foot forward on race day. So the priority right now is not to build fitness or to run certain volume, but rather your number one priority, especially if you're facing an injury or sickness, is to be as healthy as you can on race day and prioritize everything you need to do to be healthy on race day. And it sounds like she's already doing that in many ways, but the question in the case of injury and the question in case of sickness is not, what should things look like in two weeks' time? Rather if you have time, it's the question is, what can I do today to take the next logical step forward to a healthy start line? And for her, that might look like different things depending on whether or not she can run or not. It could mean cross-training. It could mean doing some sort of injury recovery exercises that maybe she's gotten from a PT. It could mean going to a PT to try to get the diagnosis that she needs. It could mean taking the day off, if that's the right thing in order to make sure that you can be healthy on the start line. I don't know what it looks like because I don't know what the injury is, but I can give some guidelines. But before we even talk about that, the theme here is the same as for the whole episode, which is that you have to stay present. You have to take it day by day. You can't leap ahead. And in this case, I would want her to defer the decision about race day as long as possible. Theoretically, you've already paid for this race, depending on the travel setup and whether or not you're traveling far, doing something local or whether or not you could have some travel that you might be able to cancel. There's going to be a timeline established by the circumstances of the race. And in an ideal scenario, I want you to wait as long as possible to make a decision about what to do on race day, based on what your body gives you each day and how it responds. I've had situations where somebody, including most recently at Houston, where somebody was dealing with an injury leading up to the day before the race itself, who was going to wake up that morning and see how the legs felt, go to the start line to see how it felt, start the early mile, see how it felt, and then choose what to do in the race based on how the body responded. That person ultimately didn't quite get their goal in Houston, but did finish the race, did run really well, still earned a Boston qualifier even though she was going for a little bit more than that. So you want to delay as long as possible. And then once you have that timeline established as to when your drop dead date is, so to speak, when you have to make that ultimate decision by, then you go back to the present and you ask yourself each day, what's the next logical thing I need to do in order to be healthy on that starting line? She's already staking some of the steps, has the PT appointment scheduled? Whether or not she runs will be dependent on how the injury is responding. One rule of thumb that I generally use as it relates to, can I move or not, is what's the pain on a scale from 1 to 10? If it's a 3 or less and doesn't get worse as you go, as you run, then typically it's okay to still run, at least until you can get into a PT to get it further diagnosed. If it's a 4 or greater or if it's a 3 and extends to a 4 or 5 on the run, then that's a sign that you shouldn't be running, that you should take a break until you have that opportunity to speak to somebody so you can help you with the diagnosis. You can also consider cross-training during that time, meaning doing other low-impact aerobic activities that are low-intensity such as biking or swimming or elliptical. During that time, replacing not necessarily the miles one for one, but the minutes one for one, as long as it's below those pain thresholds I just talked about. As long as it's 3 or less on a 1 to 10 scale and doesn't get worse as you go, then you are okay to cross-train for an equivalent time that you might be running until you can get that proper diagnosis and figure out what's going on. So these are things you can still do that are going to keep the aerobic stimulus there to maintain fitness, that are going to keep the legs moving, to keep them primed and sharpened, that are going to allow you the space to potentially recover while you're dealing with and or figuring out what that injury is. But the question is what can I do today to take that next logical step forward? And you just put those blinders on, focus on each day, ask yourself, what does today hold for me? Is it a run? Is it cross training? Is it rehab? Is it a trip to a PT? Maybe it's a combination of some of those things. But what you don't want to do is overdo any of it. You don't have to panic. You don't have to freak out. Your goal is to be healthy on the start line. That is it. It is not necessarily to build fitness. And I've had people do really extreme tapers because of injury and still show up on the start line and still be able to run a really solid race, even though maybe their taper was more extreme than normal. That has happened before, and I'm hopeful that it will happen in Cecilia's case. But her job is to stay as present as she can be, take it one day at a time, up until that point where she has to make a decision, and then ultimately make a decision. And then as it relates to making that decision, that's where you want to take the input of your practitioners to the extent that you have them, a PT, an ortho, a chiro, whoever you may be working with to figure out and diagnose your injury, they'll also be able to work with you and figure out what are the risks related to your race. Some will say you can't make it worse by racing. Some will say if you race, it will get a lot worse, and you're putting yourself in a danger zone. If, for example, if you have some sort of bone stress or something like that, then that's typically the type of injury that you don't want to race on because you could risk a full fracture. Oftentimes, soft tissue injuries might have a little more leeway from that standpoint, but that's where you want to get the advice of a professional to say, hey, if I run on this, if I still do this, and then focus on rehab on the other side, is that going to permanently damage me or extend the injury recovery time in a way that's extreme or potentially put me at risks that I don't know about today? So those are the types of questions you want to talk to a PT about. Use that to inform your decision as well as, of course, all the feedback that you're getting from your body along the way as you take those steps. And you got to look at it day by day. And the same is true, by the way, if you're sick. If you're sick and I was sick before Houston last January, and I had to ask myself each day, what can I do today to take my next logical step forward to not only be as healthy as I can, but also to move the body a little bit. And in those cases, I was only able to do short runs without really stressing the body too much because I was coughing, had bronchitis, had some other challenges. And once that fever went away, I still wanted to move a little bit, but I wasn't able to do it in a very robust fashion, especially in that final 10 days, because it would have compromised my ability to recover from that sickness and give me the best chance to be as healthy as I could be on that starting line. Certainly the race wasn't what I wanted, but I was still able to do it at a fairly high level because I managed the workload in that final period of time as best I could, given the sickness I had. Then I also had to make a decision about Race Day as to pulling back a little bit from my goals, which I did, in order to try to give myself the best opportunity to have a good experience on Race Day. And depending on how you're feeling, Cecilia, you may want to consider the same thing, just to take away some of the risk from pushing too hard, give yourself a little bit more space and buffer to have a good experience on Race Day in spite of this injury, in spite of what you might be facing. So that's what I would tell Cecilia, stay present, stay present. And as I was thinking about answering her question, I was also thinking how important that message is in all of our work, in all of our training, in all of our racing situations, is that we often want to get ahead of ourselves. But it's so, so important to stay present in the work. And that doesn't mean you don't look ahead, you don't plan, you don't dream. Certainly, that's a part of the equation. But once those things are established, once you have the blueprint written and you know what you're shooting for, then you got to pull yourself to the present and look immediately ahead of you and ask yourself, what's the next logical step? And so, we're going to talk about some examples of that today, both from training and from races. And I'm going to mostly be giving you practical examples of how that manifests, because I think that will be the easiest way to understand what I'm talking about. But before we get into the details of those examples, I want to just kind of set the tone with the overall perspective here. I think if you're approaching training and goal setting in the right way, then you're kind of living in two minds, or at least you're bouncing back and forth between two minds. On one hand, you are allowing yourself to dream and plan for the future. You're thinking about what the ultimate goals are, what your purpose is in trying to achieve those goals. You're allowing yourself to dream and have space for those dreams, even when you might be dealing with a near-term injury. I think making sure you have the future in mind is important periodically. But you can't stay there, you can't live there. Because most of the time, you then need to flip back to the present, and you need to ask yourself, what's the next logical step towards that dream, towards that goal? And ultimately, you have to have both. You have to have the dreams, because that's what keeps the fire alive. It also gives you the framework for planning, towards your dreams and thinking big picture, seeing the forest, as I talked about in an earlier episode or more recent episode. You still got to see the forest for the trees, but then you got to go back to the other mindset and ask yourself, okay, what's the next logical step? So it's having this duality of mind and bouncing back and forth between the two. The dreaming keeps the fire alive, keeps you motivated, keeps you connected to the purpose for the work, so that you're motivated to get out the door every day when it gets hard or when the weather's bad, or when you have a bad day. But then you have to ask yourself, okay, what's next? And then get very, very present. Sometimes people want to live in between, but I want you to live in the day to day. Ask yourself, okay, what do I need to do today to take that next logical step? So you've done the dreaming, you understand your purpose, you've done the planning around that meaning, hey, here's my 18-month plan in chunks to try to go after that next step along the pathway to my dream. But once that's done, once you've established what the future should look like, then you gotta live in the present, you gotta take it day by day. You can't get ahead of yourself. And in the case of this discussion, we're gonna be talking about even taking it maybe step by step or rep by rep through a workout. So, here we go. We're gonna be talking about what it looks like to both train and race in the present. And I've given you an example related to injury and sickness, but now we're gonna be talking about the examples around everyday training. And we'll start with what it looks like to be present in your training. What does it look like to be present in your training? And I'm gonna give you both a day by day perspective on this and a within run or within workout perspective of this with some examples. First on the day by day side, when it comes to training, and again, this assumes you've established the big picture, you know what your training plan looks like, you've got all of that ready to roll. We're not planning anymore. We're actually executing at this point. And you look at your calendar and you say, okay, today is Monday. What do I need to do today to take that next logical step forward? What does my schedule look like today? Perhaps you have on a Monday, you have a medium long run. And then your question is, okay, well, what is my purpose for today? Well, what's the purpose for a medium long run? A medium long run is an aerobic capacity building run done at easy efforts. That helps you establish the global aerobic capacity that you need by building volume, by building consistent volume, that gives you the staying power to run race pace for longer and longer periods of time. It's that foundational easy running that gives you the staying power to go run race pace, as long as you need to run race pace. And so that's the purpose of the medium long run, which means that when you're executing your medium long run, you're doing it at an easy conversational pace, typically at least a minute slower than marathon pace or a minute and a half slower than half marathon pace. You're doing it for the distance that you have prescribed, and you're resisting the temptation to do anything else on that day. If you do anything else on that day, you are wasting your time. So you are staying present in the work by executing that run with the purpose that it was intended. Versus you go out on that run, and you think, oh man, I feel great today. I'm just going to hammer it. That is not being present in the purpose of the day. Same is true if you're maybe doing a workout day. And you say, all right, how can I be present in the work on a workout day? It means you're going to show up, and you're going to do the workout as prescribed at the paces that are given to you by your coach or by the training plan that you're following so that you can execute exactly as prescribed and accomplish the building block or the puzzle piece to the overall picture that needs to be accomplished. Or if it's a recovery day, that means you had a quality workout or a long run on the day before, and today is all about easy movement to create blood flow to promote healing, so that you can then go do the next hard or long thing. So your job on that day is to run even easier than normal, to go maybe two to three minutes slower than your marathon pace, or two and a half to three and a half minutes slower than your half marathon pace, in order to create that movement which promotes blood flow at such an easy effort that it is healing, that makes you feel better on the other side of that run than when you started. That is staying present in your training. It's executing the purpose of the day as it was intended instead of doing something differently, or getting ahead of yourself, or getting caught up in feeling good, or maybe following somebody else that you're running with who might be going too fast. Being present in training is taking that plan you have and executing it day by day at the intended purpose of each day. Because when it all adds up if you do that day by day, mile by mile, step by step, then it's going to lead you on a path to get your goal for that race that you might be targeting. Versus not executing the plan for the day, jumbling things, skipping things, doing something differently than you had planned, especially without a reason to do so, you're not being present. You're not putting the building blocks together in a way that's going to allow you to have success. On race day. And it's interesting because people will mix those things up, will not execute the purpose of the day, will do things differently than prescribed, will run faster than they should, will take their recovery runs too fast, will skip their recovery runs because they were quote sore. They'll make those decisions. And then they'll wonder on race day, why it didn't work out the way they wanted it to. And it all comes back to, were you present, were you executing each day, day by day, according to the purpose of the day, or not? And look, it doesn't mean you have to be perfect. I'm not saying that. Because there are certainly times when your body or your schedule or your stress might call for something different when you look at it day by day. In which case, you should still be present. Perhaps you have a situation, and this is where we get to some of the examples, where making a change makes sense is actually a byproduct of being present in the purpose of the day, in the moment. You might have a day where you didn't sleep last night, or you woke up feeling sick or feverish. In which case, you might look at your schedule and see a medium long run, and you might say, I'm not going to do that today, or I'm going to run a small portion of that run and take what my body gives me on the day and live to fight another day. Because I am not physically prepared to execute that run on this day, as I had hoped. And if you make that decision, but because you're present and because you're honest with yourself about how you're feeling and what's going on in your body, then that's an okay decision to make. Does that mean you make up that run on another day? Not necessarily. It might mean that you get a short run in, and then you live to fight another day, and you move on and you pick up the next day on your schedule and try to execute it in its intended purpose. So this isn't about blindly following the plan. Certainly, I want you to listen to your body along the way. But it is about when you are feeling good, you are executing the purpose of your day as intended. And if you're sick or injured, as I've mentioned in the case of Cecilia, then the question is, what do I need to do today to feel healthy so that I can pick up on my schedule and build back on to the plan? So that's what it looks like to be present day by day. Now, let's talk about what it looks like to be present within a run or within a workout. And this is where you need to be present in how your body's feeling. You need to be present in the effort that you're trying to achieve. You need to be present in how you're responding rep by rep. So when it comes to executing a workout, and we'll use the example of a workout that has a certain prescribed number of reps. And I always give a range for reps personally, because sometimes you're going to feel good, and you're going to do all of them, and sometimes you're not going to feel good, and you're going to be able to do only a fewer number of reps, and I want you to still be able to claim success on that week. So just as an example, there are times when I'll prescribe 800-meter reps, and maybe I'll give a range. I'll say you're going to do 6 to 8 times 800, or 8 to 10 times 800 at certain paces, with a certain amount of rest, often 90 seconds or 2 minutes rest, and people will ask me, well, how do I know how many reps I should do? And this is where it comes to being present in the workout, and listening to your body, and asking yourself, okay, when I get to that 6th rep, and the range is 6 to 8, am I ready to do a 7th? And then once you get through 7, am I ready to do an 8th? So instead of jumping ahead and asking yourself, well, should I do 6 or 8? I want you to simply work into the workout and let the workout decide whether or not you do 6 or 8. So you start, you progress into it, you do the reps, one by one by one, and then you get to that 6th rep and you ask yourself, can I do another rep and feel like I'll still have something in the tank for one more? Because you always want to finish feeling like you could do one more that you don't end up doing, but that does indicate you've got a little space at the end of the workout that allows you to know that you can still do it and do it manageably and in control. So you get to six, can I do a seventh and be comfortable? If the answer is yes, then you do a seventh. If you get through seven and then you ask yourself, can I do an eighth and still be comfortable feeling like I could do one more? And the answer is yes, then you do it. Now some signs that you can't do it, maybe your pace starts to fall off, maybe your form starts to fall apart. If those things start to happen and you're aware of it, then being present in the moment, you'll say, all right, my paces are falling off, my form's falling apart, I can feel my shoulders getting tense or my arm swing getting sloppy, or maybe sometimes your legs do wonky things, like some people, like their knees will hit each other, or one foot will bang their other ankle when they start to get sloppy with their form. If that starts to happening, if that starts happening, then you know that it's time to pull the plug. And so I want you in a workout to basically work through the number of reps based on how you're feeling in the moment versus deciding beforehand. Now you can have the intention to do all of them beforehand, but then you still have to listen and be present in the moment once you get there and execute them one by one, so that if things do fall apart or if things do get sloppy, then you're willing to call it. And this is where I think it's helpful to have a coach who can watch, but if you don't, then you have to watch, you have to be accountable. And being accountable means truly, truly listening to your body and being honest with yourself. And there will be times where you choose to do six reps instead of the eight on the full end of the range. And you may not know whether that was the right decision or not. And that's okay. You should trust your instincts and then make that decision. And once that decision is made and you've walked away from it, showered, looked at your data, reviewed it, think back, and you ask yourself, did I make the right call today? And then you have to assimilate those choices to being able to make better choices in the future. Take your lessons and walk away being informed about what you might do differently next time. And as long as you're learning, then it doesn't matter the decision you've made. As long as you're learning, can assimilate it to future decisions, then that's a win. Now, that's a decision related to a workout. Now, you may have a decision as it relates to a run, a long run, a medium long run, a recovery run, or maybe you get 75% through that run, and you just feel terrible. Things aren't going well, everything feels sluggish, maybe you feel like you're bonking, maybe your form is falling apart, maybe something's hurting, and it just doesn't feel right. Those situations can happen too, in which case you want to be present, and perhaps you make a decision to call it on that day, and that might be an okay choice. It doesn't happen to me often, but there are times when I go out for runs, and I just feel terrible. It just doesn't feel right. Maybe everything feels sluggish, legs feel heavy, something feels like it's hurt. And in those situations, again, it doesn't happen very often. Sometimes I'll call the run and just stop, and I'll cut it short, get back, live to fight another day, figure out what's going on. Maybe I was under-fueled, maybe I didn't sleep well, maybe I was under stress. Maybe there's no explanation. The body just didn't have it on the day. And instead of blindly just forcing myself through it, I recognize when it wasn't ready to finish the full run, and I pulled the plug and made that decision. And that is an okay choice if the body just doesn't have it on a day. So be present in those moments as well. Now, another example that I want to talk about as it relates to being present in training is also being present in your body. And being able to feel pace, feel effort, and really, really listening to the cues that it's giving. Because all these things I just talked about in terms of following the purpose for the day, knowing how many reps you can do in a workout, knowing whether or not you should cut a run short, these all come back to being able to feel things out. Being able to ignore your watch, ignore what your watch is telling you, and just trust what you're feeling in your body. And you have to be able to learn the instincts related to that. You have to be able to run by feel, run by effort. Know when things are going well or when they're not. Understand if your body's getting sloppy with your form or things are starting to break down. You have to be present and know what that feels like. Or if your breathing is getting out of control, or your heart rate is getting out of control, not because your watch told you that, but because you're feeling it in your body. Those are all parts of being present, and maybe it's the underlying part of it. Maybe it's the most extreme part of what you need to know when it comes to being present in your training, is that, is to be able to feel, listen to your body. And that means not being obsessed with what your watch is telling you, but rather being obsessed with the cues that your body is giving you. Your breathing, your heart rate, how your muscle tension feels in all parts of your body, your sweat rate, all of it. You should be in tune with all of those things. And you can only be in tune with those things if you actually pay attention to them. If you listen to them, if you're present in your body as you do these things, if you're observant. And sure, maybe you're using your data as well, but more sparingly, and you're actively listening to both versus being obsessed with, obsessed with just your watch. So stay present in your body that allows you to then make these decisions in each moment, whether it be the number of reps, the length of the run, maybe how fast you go on a given day. All of that goes back to being present and tying into the cues of how you're feeling. So those are examples of being present in training. Let's talk about being present in race prep or in race execution, and I'm going to talk about those two parts in turn. We're going to talk about being present in your preparation. We're going to talk about being present in the race itself, because I think executing a race well, crushing your goals really comes down to that presence. So what does it look like to be present in preparation? Well, it means focusing on the things that you can control in the time and space that you can control it. Oftentimes, we get ahead of ourselves. We're thinking about mile 20 of a marathon or mile 10 of a half marathon, and we're worried about that two weeks out from race day or one week out from race day or two days before. And that's not something we can necessarily impact. And that doesn't mean you shouldn't do things to prepare yourself so that you're ready for the moment, late in a race, when things might get difficult. But how do you stay present? Because when we get ahead of ourselves, when we think about mile 22 weeks out, and we're obsessed with and worried about what might happen there, then we're not doing everything we can to make sure we can control all the variables and give ourselves the best chance to crush that mile in the race. So it's important to stay present in preparation. The other part to acknowledge here is that when we're preparing for a race, we're going to have all sorts of nerves, anxieties, worries, thoughts that are coming into our brain that aren't productive. Now it is absolutely okay for those things to enter your mind. That is normal part of being human. If you have a big goal and you're chasing something that's challenging, then those are normal thoughts and feelings to have. Nervousness, anxiety, fear, worry, all those things are normal. The question is, what do you do when you have those feelings? And I would submit that I want you to acknowledge them without judgment. So tell yourself that it's okay to be worried. It's okay to have fear. It's okay to have anxiety, but that just means that your goal is big enough. It's also, by the way, your body's way of preparing you to do the hard thing. It's a form of the fight or flight response. And then the question is, how do you channel it? Do you let it spiral into negativity, or do you allow yourself to channel it into productivity or preparation? And, that's what being present in preparation for a race means. It's not letting yourself live in the anxiety, fear, and worry. It's acknowledging those things, setting it aside, and then re-channeling it into, what can I do? What's the next logical step I can take in terms of preparing for the race? Which can look like a lot of different things. It can look like studying the course map. It can look like writing down your race plan or preparing your race plan based on the terrain of the course. It can look like preparing your nutrition and hydration plan. It could look like planning the logistics around the event itself, whether you're traveling, what that looks like, what your meals are going to be, when you're going to wake up on the morning of, what you're going to eat that morning, how you're going to get to the start line, where you're going to park, how you're going to walk there if that's a part of the equation. All of those variables are a part of preparation that are about being present in your preparation. There's also, of course, the mental preparation you could be doing. You could be thinking about your mantras. You could be thinking about your purpose. You could be thinking about the other mental tools you're going to use. You could also be visualizing race day. And so while I don't want you worried about what might happen at mile 20, I'm okay with you visualizing the race from start to finish as if you are racing it with positivity in mind and with your goal on the clock at the end of the race, using all of those things that you are thinking about in preparation in a visual way to give your body the recognition, at least the nervous system, the recognition that it's normal that you've done this before, before you actually go and do it. So those are all things we can do when we're present in our preparation that allow us to control all the variables, that allow us to be as in control of the things we can control as possible. And certainly there will be things outside of our control, with the weather perhaps being the biggest example of that. But I want you to stay present. And so when we talk about as you're getting close to race day, there's sort of two different ways, two macro different ways of preparing yourself, or dealing with the nerves and anxiety that might come. One way is the associative way, which is all of the things I just talked about. It's associating with the race. It's doing the things in preparation that allow you to control the variables you can control so that you are ready to go. You know exactly what you need to do at each moment in order to execute your plan. And then there's the dissociative path, which is dissociating from the race. And that can be OK too. That can be about staying present too. Whereas instead of worrying about the things that might get you, the boogeyman that might be in the closet on race day, you're going to dissociate and say, all right, I'm going to distract myself by watching a movie, reading a book, watching Netflix, binging on a show, on Hulu, whatever it may be to take your mind off of things on Netflix so that you're not thinking about the things that can go wrong, but rather you're dissociating and you're enjoying something else and staying present by watching that. Because one of the things I like to say is that you can't run the whole race at once, and you can't prepare for the whole race at once. You have to chunk it up. You have to take each thing in turn. And in order to do that, you have to plan all the little components at once. And so when the nerves, anxiety comes, acknowledge it without judgment, set it aside and refocus into the things you can do to prepare. Or dissociate, watch the fun movie, or binge on your favorite show on Netflix and you'll be good. So that's in preparation. Then how do I stay present in the race itself? How do I stay present in the race itself? And this is tricky because we want to get ahead of ourselves sometimes, or we want to panic, and or re-plan things in the moment. And this can happen in a variety of ways, but one of the classic examples that I can think of is, what do I do when the pace that I run is different from the plan? So for example, maybe the plan was to start 30 seconds slower than your target pace and work down from there over the first several miles. And maybe you ran too slow or too fast in that first mile. There is a tendency to then take that outcome and change everything as a result. And I don't want you to do that. I want you to instead stay present and then execute the next mile on plan. You took that information in, it's now a data point that doesn't mean anything relative to changing the future of your plan, but it does mean something in terms of calibrating where you are. And so, if you came through a little bit slow, no big deal. Don't over correct or do anything crazy, but adjust down, try to hit the next mile on plan, whether that be going a little bit slower or a little bit faster than the last mile. And believe me, that's hard to do. Everybody wants to either adjust or over correct one way or they might say, well, I'm just going to roll with it because I'm going faster than planned, but I'm just going to stick with it and see what happens. No, don't do that. Use the data collected to adjust so that you can execute your next mile on plan and then continue to do so. And basically, over the course of a half marathon or a marathon, until you get to the end, that's the way I want you to operate. Don't adjust up or down with the next mile, just try to run the next mile on plan. And then when you get to the end, when you get to the final three miles of a half or the final five miles of a marathon, if you're feeling good, then you can adjust faster than target for that close, but not before that. So you have to stay present within each mile. Use the mile you just run as a data point to help you calibrate the next mile because I want you to execute the next mile exactly on plan versus just rolling with it. By the way, this rule applies in workouts too. You might be in a workout and you might have been told by your coach to run x pace for an 800 meter rep and you go too fast in that rep. And instead of saying, well, I'm just going to roll with it and go too fast. No, you should recognize that in the moment. Make the adjustment back. Try to hit that next rep on plan. Or if you're doing a long tempo or steady run and you run one mile too fast, be present in the moment, recognize that and then try to run the next mile on plan versus just blindly rolling with it. And if you practice that in training, you'll be able to execute that on race day. I don't want you to roll with it. I don't want you to get out of yourself. I want you to over correct. I just want you to run the next mile on plan. So use the data collected along the way and run the next mile as intended. Another way this can manifest in a race is when people might be in the middle miles of a race and they start to worry about how things are going to be in six miles time. So maybe you're at 14 and you're worried about what's going to happen at 20. That's not helpful. Because one thing, if you've done enough half marathons or marathons, how you feel in this mile may or may not correlate to how you feel in a few miles or in six miles. I can tell you in one of my fastest marathons, it was a really cold morning. It was probably about 28 to 30 degrees at the start. And as I got into that race and started conservatively, I was working down to my target pace. As I started to get close to my target marathon pace, it did not feel good. It felt cumbersome, felt like I was working too hard. And that could have been an opportunity to panic. If I allowed myself to panic. But instead of allowing myself to panic, I stayed present. And I went to work using my rhythm mantras in order to try to relax, control my breathing, control my heart rate, let the body flow, and just ease into that pace more comfortably. And it took almost eight miles in that race to start to feel that way. But eventually, the pace started to feel easy again. Not sure what happened. Maybe it was just my body warming up on a cool day. But I was able to use my rhythm mantra to ease into that rhythm, to suddenly make marathon pace go from feeling hard to feeling sustainable for 26 miles. And I never had a bad mile after that eighth mile. Every mile to the finish was solid. Now, if I'd let myself get ahead of myself or start to worry that mile five was going to feel the same as 15, instead of just being present in my mantra as in this mile, then I could have spiraled out of control. Or maybe I would have quit and said, all right, well, if it's this hard now, I'm just going to stop because it's going to be this hard at 15 and 25 as well. And there's no way I can run this pace feeling this bad for that long. But I didn't do that. I stayed present, worked through it, and it all turned out okay and ended up getting a PR on that day. And I've had other races like that, where how you feel in this mile doesn't necessarily correlate to how you might feel in three miles or six miles. And so you have to stay present. Use your tools in this moment to work through whatever you're facing. Don't get ahead of yourself because there is hope that you will feel differently in a little bit. If you just keep moving because especially in these long races, as I said, how you feel in one mile does not necessarily correlate. I've also had moments where I felt bad at mile 16 and I felt better at 22. And I've had all different variations of that. And in fact, in the 21 marathons that I've done, I would say that each one has felt different. There have been different challenges in each one. So how you're feeling now does not predict how you might feel in a few miles. And it's not helpful to think that. So you have to stay where you are. Don't let your mind wander to the future of the race. Focus on exactly where you are. Run the mile you're in. Take it mile by mile, as cliche as that sounds. Hit the paces that you're targeting. Use the tools you have available to you in that segment of the race, because you don't know what the future segments are going to bring. And it's not productive to let your mind wander there. You've got plenty to accomplish in this moment in order to set yourself up for success in those future miles in order to set yourself up to feel good in those future miles. And by the way, this is something you can practice in training too by being present in a workout. Oftentimes, we're worried about the later reps. They're going to be so hard. They're going to be so difficult. Well, that's not how you should think about it. That's not helpful or productive. You take it mile by mile. You take it rep by rep in the workout. You do want it at time. And you worry about how hard those later reps are going to be when you get there. Same is true in a race. You worry about how hard the later miles, or easy the later miles are going to be when you get there. And all you can do is make sure that you're prepared beforehand with all the mental tools you can bring to the table, and that in the race itself, you're executing each mile one at a time, one step at a time, so that you're as prepared as possible when that next moment comes. And then you let those later moments take care of themselves. And if you're as prepared as you can be, oftentimes, you nail it. But it's not productive to get ahead of yourself to worry about those later miles at the beginning of the race or in the middle. You worry about them when you get there. And I know that's easier said than done, but it's absolutely critical to executing your best race. So that's being present in preparation for a race and in execution of a race. Easier said than done, as I said, it's something that takes practice, that takes constantly reminding yourself to come back to where you are. And there may be moments, and again, just like with worries and anxieties and fears pre-race, there may be moments where your mind jumps ahead, and it's okay that that happens, that's normal. But then you must acknowledge it, recognize it for what it is, and then pull yourself back to the present, and then focus on the next mile you need to execute, or the next thing you need to do in that race in order to get to the goal that you want to get. Stay present. It's absolutely critical for success in training and for success on race day. So with that, we'll wrap this episode. As always, you can check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Facebook or Instagram at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.