Welcome to episode 335 of the Running Rogue Podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung. We've got another episode today with James Dodds joining me, but we're interviewing a former Rogue coach and someone who has gone on to make a career out of running and wearables. And his name is Jeff Knight. Excited to have him on, because he's been a while since we've caught up. But we're gonna dig into the science of running and wearables and talk through how to think about using them in your running world, both the do's and the don'ts. We will get more into Jeff's background, but he's a scientist by training and education. He is a running coach and is now deep in the industry of wearables. So he's got the perfect combination of skills and experience to bring to this conversation. And I'm excited to chat with him and bring him on. So we'll get to that in just a second before we jump into our conversation with Jeff. Want to quickly thank my sponsor for this episode, Run Johngee. They're a great partner of mine, have now been for six months, and I'm loving their gear, especially as the seasons turn, and I can wear more of it. I'll give you an offer code and talk more about my partnership with them mid-episode, so stay tuned for that. Okay, let's jump into our conversation with Jeff Knight on Running and Wearables. Here we go. Welcome, Jeff Knight, to the Running Rogue podcast. Jeff, it is so good to have you on and see you because it's been too long. How are you?

It has been too long. It's great to be here. Thanks for inviting me on to chat on this lovely Monday morning. It's great.

And we've got James joining as well. James, how are you?

I'm doing well. I had a lot of fun at ACL this weekend.

ACL, which is Austin City Limits Music Festival for those that don't know, it's two weekends a year here in Austin. And it was that time of year and it ended up being a perfect weekend for it.

Yeah. Perfect weekend for long runs. Perfect weekend to get out. Noah Khan was the show for me. He's on the rise and he delivered.

I don't know Noah Khan. So you're going to have to give me just give me and the listeners a quick little music plug on Noah Khan.

He's from the New England area. He's definitely like big on the strings. He jokingly said that he's been referred to as the Jewish Ed Sheeran. And the crowd got a nice laugh out of that, but he's just got some deep meaningful lyrics that has a little bit of banjo in there. He's definitely big on the strings, but he brought a similar category, I would say, as the Avett Brothers, who are my favorite band. But gosh, he just has a way of putting lyrics together that they hit. And then of course, I love that string sound. But he brought his rock and roller side a little bit. He really jammed out at ACL. I kept thinking, I can't believe he's given us that much. He just played his heart out. I was like, he could have phoned it in, he could have done anything, but he chose to just go all in.

There you go. Music tips from James. That'll be our spinoff podcast. So Jeff, I'm assuming you weren't at ACL.

I was not. No ACL for me.

Taking care of the kids, I'm sure.

You know, this one was one where it was a little bit of like, wow, it's such a nice weekend. I wouldn't mind being out there. But you know, there's also this thing called Hulu where they stream Austin City Limits, which was pretty great.

There you go. The parents version.

That's right.

Cool. Well, Jeff, as I mentioned in the intro, Jeff used to work for Rogue as one of our coaches, as well as our training director. He basically wrote all of our core curriculum for many years back in the day. How long has it been, Jeff? When did you leave Rogue?

It's been a while. It's been a little close to eight years or so, because I think I left in August of 15. So, yeah.

Crazy.

Over eight years.

Time flies. So, I want to go back, get a little bit on your background, and then end your resume, so to speak, for this topic. We're going to be talking about running and wearables. And Jeff has been deep, especially from a career perspective, in wearables over the last eight years since you left. But prior to that, how did you get into coaching with us? Give us the full background.

Yeah, I'll try to keep it brief, because once you're starting to talk about yourself, it's really great to just go on and on for a captive audience. Now, I'd say my interest in coaching and wearables, it's hard to tell exactly when these things start. My family was very into athletics growing up, and so that was kind of always there. But in a way that fitness and sport was just normalized, it was just like a way of life. It was not something that was out of the norm. And I think a lot of people have that experience. And then you grow up, you go to college, or you start growing up, you go to college, you start experiencing things, and you have really standard paths that people lay out for you if you are interested in science or anything mathematic. And it's like, oh, you should be a physician or you should do whatever. And so you explore those routes a little bit, and then you also experience other things along the way. So at that point in time, I was like, well, I don't think I really want to go the medicine route, but I still like this path that I'm on of science and thinking, oh, that was pretty interesting. So after undergrad, I went to grad school and down here in Austin, that's how I wound up here in Austin and the local Rogue community, not the broader Rogue community, but the local one here. And I was doing biochemistry and did that for a while and was like, there's parts of this that I really like. And then there was parts of it that I just didn't like. It was a very kind of isolating field. A lot of time in the lab, a lot of late nights, a lot of time with bacteria, which are not the most interesting of people. But as throughout this process goes, as any grad student in sciences will tell you, or as any grad student in sciences will experience, you do a lot of undergrad teaching, you teach a lot of labs. And what I started to realize was like, wow, I really like the people side of this. I like the sort of teaching element of this. And had this sort of bug placed around sport and fitness had been active and had continued to be active throughout undergrad and grad school. So I started exploring a graduate degree in sports science at the University of Texas and had a professor in the biochem side. My PI was supportive of me transitioning over. So I finished up my biochem degree, moved into basically an applied field or an applied program as part of the sports science program. So I spent some time in the lab and got to hang out in the human performance lab there at the University of Texas. And we had an opportunity to play with a lot of new wearables and things at that time that were coming out. And this was over 10 years ago. So what was cutting edge at that time was not really that cutting edge. GPS was just starting to become a mainstream thing in terms of fitness tracking, not obviously from a broader standpoint, but from a small enough form factor, you could track fitness. But we saw all sorts of stuff. We played around with anything that you could think of that was gonna be kind of in this space. We now take for granted from heart rate tracking and so on and so forth. But during that time, also still kind of had that pull, that feel towards teaching and really like that side of it. And I can remember one day, kind of going, gosh, what am I gonna do with myself as I approached this point of graduation? And going, I've got to get a job here. And I was reading The Statesman, it's a newspaper if your listeners will remember, there are these like big gray sheets of paper with like small font and you unfold them and you read through them. And I was reading this article, I think it was Pam LeBlanc at her fit city blog, or I'm sorry, column, not blog, column. And she had this piece on this elite running team in Austin and was like, oh, this sounds like pretty interesting. I love running. I'd been running for a bit, had run a couple of marathons and was like, oh, this sounds brilliant. So I was thinking, how can I get my foot in the door here? And luckily enough, the guy that was running the team had gone to undergrad at the same place. I'd gone to undergrad, or had considered going there, had spent a little bit of time there, and also had a connection to same undergrad as Paul Crozza, who was one of the OG running people here in town. This place is called Abilene Christian. I was like, oh man, this is just enough of a connection to cold email this person and be like, hey, here's a thing. And I thought, well, I could maybe pitch myself as a scientific liaison, nutrition, physiologist type person, because that was where my degree and specialty really lied. And so I was like, hey, why don't you bring me on? And is there anything I could do for you? I'd be happy to help do any type of the science side of the training program for you and help out there. And that person was like, yeah, sure, I'll do it. And here I am. So that's sort of the origin story of how I got my foot in the door at Rogue.

This was Steve Sisson you're talking about.

Yep, exactly, Steve Sisson.

Who was my cohost for the first 100 or so episodes, one of the Rogue founders. And at that time, I was coaching Team Rogue Elite, which became Rogue Athletic Club, which you were assistant coach, which became your foot in the door for Rogue, which ultimately led to coaching our everyday athletes as well, coaching one of our groups, Team Rogue, and then becoming our training director.

That's about it. Yeah, that sort of closes the gap between, I'd say 10 and 15.

What I wanted to throw in there though, is what I like about it is when you think back on these beginning stories, you came for one set of reason, but I have this outlook on life of like, we have to come up with reasoning, we have to make choices, and we have to move towards something. And it's in the movement and in the process of going and experiencing and trying, that reason B, the real reason ultimately, is like revealed to us. Because you became a great coach and there's still so many people that talk about you. You and I became good friends, became friends with Chris, like you developed community, et cetera. But I loved that scientific angle that you brought even to me, even though you were coming to work with Steve, it's like a lot of us benefited from your technical mind and organized mind, so.

I appreciate that, thank you.

Well, that was gonna get to the question I was asking, which is when you have the theory collide with the practical, initially as an assistant there with Steve and Team Rogue Elite, and then ultimately as coach yourself with your own group, talk about that collision of theory and practical and what you learned during that process.

Yeah, that's a good question. And because so much of what we lean on, at least in the traditional sense of lab-based research and applying that, it's really tough, because as anybody that's probably talked about this or knows anything about it, all the lab-based research is primarily based on a convenient sample of eight to 12 individuals that are hanging around a performance lab. I was often a subject in research studies, so they're typically male, typically 18 to 22, and somewhat interested in that area. So it already makes it kind of hard to do a direct one-to-one application. But I think what's important is that you look at those things from a directional standpoint. And I think also the other side of it too is the lab does a good job of probably disproving or debunking things, which helps not necessarily from a dogmatic sense of like, that can never be right or that can never be wrong. But it gives you a little bit of narrowing of your point of view so that you can go, okay, well, maybe I don't need to explore that side, but I can explore this side a little bit. But in terms of the directional element of it is, it gives you something that goes, okay, well, how can I go and maybe explore this or apply this in a direct sense of like, in my own training or in my own coaching, I heard this or read this thing about plyometrics or about heat training or about hydration. And it kind of helps you just narrow the funnel a little bit versus just having to start strictly from like, oh, I read this thing on this forum that worked for some person or whatever that might be. So I think the directionality is really the important part of it and kind of taking it and then exploring it from there because it is ultimately always a experiment of one.

Yeah. And the interesting part too about that transition for you was because you entered a coaching environment with Steve, who might be the most intuitive driven coach that there is versus somebody who, I mean, obviously he understands the science, but he doesn't necessarily anchor there. He anchors in his intuition. And so more or less the opposite of you in a sense, in terms of how you're wired, colliding into one assistant and head coaching relationship. So how was that and what did you learn from it?

Yeah, I mean, I came in as any new practitioner comes in and that's what the very black and white view of the world. Or like, oh, wow, I read this paper and I've got the answers. Like I figured it out. Like this is it. And then you go to apply it and you realize very quickly, like, oh, that's not exactly how it works because somebody might not interpret it that way or it's not a blinded study or whatever it might be. And so, yeah, what I learned from that is that there is both an art and a science to this run training business. And yeah, I really needed that. I think, from my own personal development, had I not worked with somebody like Steve or worked at a place like Rogue, that really valued the feel of the body, I probably would have never come to that realization in such a same way. I mean, there is, because there was a number of coaches at that time that were more kind of science driven and things of that nature. So I'm really thankful in hindsight to have had that experience of having that kind of push a little bit of listening to the body and feeling the body. And that turned out to be really great because I now certainly apply that in my own training and even my approach to work today.

Yeah, that's cool.

It was probably the best possible scenario for a hard scientist to be exposed to somebody who is driven more by intuition right away. So you were with us for about five years, I think, in one role or another, and then left to take a cool opportunity at Under Armor, where you went to work directly in the product side of wearables. So talk about what you've been doing since.

Yeah, I left Rogue in 15, August 2015, like we said. And at that point in time, it was a really interesting moment in the broader, say sports tech, connected fitness space, where a lot of these larger companies were acquiring some of these early sports tech, fitness tech success stories. Like ASICS had bought a running app, Adidas had bought a running app, and Under Armour went on a massive buying spree and bought not just one running app, but two running apps, and a large nutrition app called MyFitnessPal. So at this point, they had purchased MapMyRun and that suite of apps, and this app called Endomundo, which was based in Copenhagen, Denmark. And so it really kind of like acquired this enormous health and fitness community through these acquisitions. And at that point, they also had this aspiration of, as our CEO said at the time, Kevin Planck, that I really wanted to electrify the t-shirt. And he didn't know what that meant, but he knew what his insight was, was that it's not just putting on the stuff and going to do the stuff. It's like you can be informed by sensors and technology and make better decisions. That's what he ultimately wanted to do. So he had a lot of aspirations, and Under Armour at that point in time had a lot of aspirations of going to do stuff in wearables. And so I came on at a point when we were just about to launch a thing called Health Box, which was at that time, everybody was making, and I say everybody, all the big kind of sports tech players were making a wrist contraption that did some version of sleep tracking and step tracking. And maybe had some very crude early optical heart rate monitor, which we all take for granted now, because everything has a heart rate monitor on it. It had a scale that measured body fat percentage or inferred it, and it had a heart rate chest strap, because at that point in time, wrist based heart rate was still pretty unreliable. So you had to have a still heart rate chest strap. So the idea was to kind of package all these things in one so you could have this like easy button type experience and have all of your health and fitness tracking through a single box, a health box. And so yeah, that was sort of what it kind of came into and fell into this role of helping to be the subject matter expert on how to apply the principles of these various things. So you've got training plans in these running apps. How should they work? How should they, what should be your builds for long runs? And if they're adaptive, how should they adapt? And then also at the same time, starting to dust off what I had not done really in a long time, which was really rigorous science, and validating a lot of the wearables that we were putting out and kind of making sure that things like step tracking were as good as they could be. The body fat percentage measurements were as good as they should be. So it was a really fun kind of space. It was everything that had kind of been a part of my past colliding into one thing. And we just had a lot of fun in those early, early years of putting out one wearable device after another.

Can you speak to some of the development process there? I remember you having Rogues come in to test various things, go for a run with something and come back. And you'd take the data. And because I guess I just want to give people a sense for how the sausage is made relative to some of these wearables. Because I think there's a perception perhaps that everything is completely buttoned up and 100% based on science. And once it gets to your wrist or your finger or wherever you're wearing it, it's 100%, right? It's to be taken as the word of God or something like that. But clearly it's not that way. And you obviously got to see behind the curtain on that. And that's not to take anything away from all of these products, but it's harder to develop them than it might think. People might think.

Yeah, it certainly is. And a lot of things influence the accuracy of the measures and so on and so forth. But it all kind of starts with a basic sensor of some sort. And a lot of time, these sensors come from other places. So take an accelerometer, which is this little tiny device that's been around for decades, and it just measures how fast something accelerates. So once you're kind of at a steady state, it's not really doing anything, but as long as you're constantly accelerating and decelerating, it's picking up sensation. And that, from what I understand, I worked with a person that had been in this space for many, many years, decades. He was like, oh yeah, that came from the automobile industry. And that was one of these things that had been kind of picked up and moved over. So you take these sensors that maybe have an origin in health and fitness, maybe they don't. And you start going, okay, how can I apply these to health and fitness in some way that's interesting because I have a use case for a product or whatever that might be. And really, what you do from those basic senses, you turn on the sensor and you start recording a ton of data in whatever type of application you're interested in. So at Under Armour, we had a product called Connected Footwear, and it was a shoe that looked and felt just like a shoe, except it had a small pod in it that measured your running speed and your distance and your running form. And it was basically just an accelerometer. And the amazing thing about it is that you just would start doing a lot of run tracking. So we would do thousands of miles of run tracking a year with various individuals, and that's what people from Rogue were coming into doing. And you were like, okay, we want it to work when you're doing a fart lick. We want it to work when you're running at this speed, or we want it to work for people that are forefoot or rear foot or whatever these various kind of conditions are. And you just basically collect all the data you can, and then you throw it at people with really fancy degrees in engineering or mathematics and say, hey, can you pull a signal from all of this noise? And that's an oversimplification, but because there is theoretical formulae and things like that that are out there, this is not like you're just starting from scratch from basic exploration. But to make it really good and make it right, you have to put a bunch of data at it. And that's where places like Apple have really gained an upper hand over the years is because they have the money and they have the resources available to go and throw a bunch of data at particular problems and figure things out. So it's ultimately about collecting a huge sample set and then having a basic mathematical concept or physical principles behind it and validating those principles are real through those data sets. So that's really is how it goes. You usually have a benchmark, I should say. This is mostly board by you. You have a benchmark. You have something that is your source of truth that you go and compare against. So you put them on a treadmill or you put them on a known course, or you put up fancy heart rate monitor on them and you measure the optical heart rate from the wrist and you go, okay, yeah, these match that. And this looks good in this condition where it wasn't good. What can we do about it?

At some level, you're drawing a trend line with the data, right?

Trend line, you're really just...

That's over-simplification, but you're shaping the data to an outcome you're expecting.

Yeah, you're looking for if a thing said it ran, if you know the athlete or the test subject had a heart rate of 165 or ran however many miles, you're going, okay, what of this is 165 or three miles? And okay, if it was not that, what part of this was not that? And trying to smooth out the signal from the noise at that point there. But yeah, and then there's a bunch of really fancy filtering techniques and things like that that are applied on top of it. So there's a ton of work that goes into...

And what level of accuracy were you guys looking for in order to feel good about putting something out there?

Yeah, accuracy is always a really tough standpoint to come from because there are agencies out there that help set standards. Like the Consumer Technology Association, CTA, I was part of this group for a number of years, and we worked together across various companies. So you had Fitbit and Google, and before Fitbit and Google were one thing. You had Philips, you had others who would come together and say, like, you know what, we all kind of collectively agree that these kind of standards were pretty good. And for step tracking, it was something like 10%. For heart rate, it was something else. So what you're more kind of interested in, and I think what people are looking for is some level of reliability or consistency. Because like pure accuracy is harder to come by unless you're, you know, in a heart rate sense, take that, for example, sitting still, you're like kind of laying there, not really doing much, which is why sleep is a great place to collect things like heart rate variability, which is the distance of time between beats of your heart and how much variation there is between those distances of time between the heartbeats. And if you have a lot of it, and your heart is like kind of beats a little bit funky, then it's like, oh, that's like a good thing. I mean, your heart's like really relaxed where it's like, you know, but that's hard to get during the middle of a run because there's just so much other noise and stuff happening during the run. Your fingers are moving, your device is sliding up and down, your body's at a stress state. And so, yeah, so I'd say accuracy is like relevant, but what you're really looking for is consistent accuracy. And what you don't want is something that is one day telling you one number, the next day for an equal effort or for an equal experience, a different thing, because that's more problematic. But companies have made tremendous strides here. When Apple came out with their first Apple Watch with heart rate on it, it was the worst. It was scientifically proven to be the worst optical heart rate on the market at the time. But within two years, it was the best, and it now continues to be the best. And it's not necessarily because they have better sensors. I mean, they're Apple, they have great sensors, but they also have better sensor processing and filtering and things of that nature to get to those better places too.

And probably more data than anybody.

And more data than anybody, absolutely.

Go ahead, James.

I was curious and wanted to weave, as we talk about the devices themselves and the things you're learning, back to that narrative of your scientist black and white perspective coming in and under a coach that's very intuitive, you're seeing the extreme version of the applied. Now you're back into a space of kind of a perfect, you would think in theory, perfect spot to look at applied and science and black and white. Where are you at on that maturation curve and learning curve and what's going on inside you as a person as you're moving into these data sets and guiding products? But also you've now got this background of coaching and seeing the applied so intimately with your own eyes and experience.

Yeah, because the actual engineering of these things is very black and white. It is by definition, it is if this happens, then this happens. It's a series of ifs ands. But from a human side, the actual person using the product, assuming that you're building, we're talking about running here, so let's assuming we're talking about a wearable that is in consumer driven. Well, human actually has to know what to go do. And I'll never forget this experience I had. It was probably 2015, 2016. I was still coaching, but I wasn't working at Rogue full time. And this guy that was in the Team Rogue 530 AM group, he comes up, he got Jim, he's very excited. He's like, comes up, he's like, I just got this new wearable, or like Garmin watch, whatever, it tells me cadence. My cadence is this. Like, what do you think about that? I was like, I have no idea. First off, it's like 530 in the morning, so I'm like barely awake. Second off, I don't know. Like, I don't know what is a good cadence. And you know, like that actually came back at some point, but it like sparked this thing with me that, you know, it's not just having the sensor data available, the metric available, you actually have to know what to do with it. And I think that's the ultimate struggle with it, because if you're a huge company, where you have thousands of end users, you kind of have to paint with broad strokes, because you don't actually know who's using the thing that you're using. You might have some basic demographic information on it, but you kind of have to play it safe and be like, well, you know, if this is sort of directionally the thing that's happening, then, you know, you can maybe interpret it from this way. But you know, what I've learned from that, it's like if you want someone to use your product, it's one thing to have like an accurate sensor, but you actually also have to then help somebody understand how to interpret the data. And I think that's really where the game is being played today. And that's what I hope to see more products out doing. And they're trying to, you know, apply things like artificial intelligence, you know, whether it be the new Whoop AI Coach or things of that nature where they're trying to really like understand a little bit more about you and digest the data at a more granular level about the individual and move from less like deterministic business rule type outcomes. That is to say, you know, if you see this and this happens, or you tell the person this, to actually going at an individual level, their data is being processed in such a way that it's trying to give you outcomes based on or predict outcomes based on your individual dataset. So it has to be ultimately about how the data is applied. It's not just dumping and throwing the data at people. That is, you might as well not even track it at that point.

I think that's a great answer. One, two, I'm going to go back to a very specific, and that's A, did you ever work out on the kind of like final answer on cadence? I know that was just one example, but I wanted to go to it. And here's why. One of our virtual teams actually asked on the boards, and I'll give you my answer, but someone got excited and said, hey, I read about the 180 steps per minute. Should I work on my cadence, move it up from 160? And my response was basically data shows that the average CEO is over six foot tall. And no matter how hard I work, I'm not going to reach six foot plus, right? So I tried to make a point that, all right, listen, yes, we've observed that out there. Great observation doesn't mean you can't be CEO if you're under six foot, and doesn't mean you can't run a great marathon if you don't run 180 steps per minute. Would you agree, or would you have taken a different angle? Did you ever circle back to your athlete who's bombarding you at 5.30 in the morning with questions you don't want?

Yeah, we actually worked on this problem at Underarm. We put a product out called Form Coaching, and we had this really unique opportunity because we did have a large data set, and we could look at various physiological, morphological, anthropometric, whatever components, characteristics, such as height and weight and speed and stuff. You do see relationships, and they're pretty clean. Now, obviously, can you imagine, if you close your eyes and imagine a relationship between, say, height and cadence, you might imagine this really nice, fat, black line. But the truth is, it's like a cloud that's sort of like an egg shape kind of thing around it where the line dissects the middle of the egg, and you've got some clustering on one side or the other. So you can like, you see directionality, you see trends, and so that's like helpful, right? You can be like, hey, you know what? For somebody that is, if you're 6'6, and your running partner is 5'6, and you're running the same pace, you probably shouldn't have the exact same cadence. Like, we know that. The person that's 6'6, is going to have a lower cadence. But within a comparison of people that are all 6'6, running the same pace, it's probably a little bit different. And we know that to be true. It's like intuitive to be true, too. Like, if you're a 4 runner, you've ever watched people that run 4, like their cadence is typically a little bit faster. They're running, they're like, their foot's hitting the ground underneath them, they're shortening their stride a little bit to do those things. And that's all okay. But it is helpful to know that directionally, there are these trends that exist. And if you're new to the sport, like explore those things. Because we found, I found this feature at Rogue, even before I knew anything about any of this space, that was helpful in the Rogue 101, the new Rogue class to help people with, quote unquote, overstriding. These were new runners that kind of came out had a picture in their mind about how running looked. And it was like, I need to make it look really hard because that's how it looks on commercials. And if you've ever seen people film a running commercial, well, they're not running normal. They're like really overstriding it. And so, yeah, it is helpful, I think, to have that. But you're never going to have a black and white, like for your thing, this is your golden rule. And if you don't hit this, it's all over for you. You're leaving, you're leaving, you know, seconds on the table when it comes to your race day. But directionality, yes, that is important.

I want to quickly finish your background, and then let's dig back into wearables. But you're no longer with Under Armour, have gone on to continue development in the wearable space, but in a different application. So give us a quick version of where you are now.

Yeah, so I work for a company. Our application today is in digital health. So we work within a population of people living with diabetes. That help individuals that have lost sensitivity in their extremities. So anybody that's listening to this doesn't know somebody with complex diabetes might understand that you lose sensitivity or extremities. Well, how we go and help these individuals that have lost feeling, they're at risk of really doing damage to the bottom of their feet, just like individuals wear out socks over time. We have this really unique sensor technology. It replaces an insole that goes within your normal shoe, and you pull that thing out, you put this thing in, and it has temperature sensors in it. It has pressure sensors spread throughout the bottom of it. And then you have your accelerometer, the unit we were talking about earlier, and this thing called a gyroscope, which is basically a fancy way of saying your orientation, so I can sense orientation in space. For our application, we use it to tell people, hey, you're at risk of putting too much pressure in this area for too long, you should lay off, do something different. Or the temperature sensing stuff, as people are becoming... As we all know this, if you get sick, you get a fever, your temperature is warmer, it's a sign of your body is fighting something or inflamed. And it's just like that in localized areas on the bottom of the feet, if you are really starting to generate a hot spot, as we probably... Runners that have all worn shoes that are too small at some point in time will appreciate, you can pick those things up. We've applied this technology in other ways too. So more directly of interest probably to this group is we've used it for biomechanics research. So we've applied this into other places like biomechanics labs, people interested in developing footwear, where they can take this thing and measure the raw signals of running form. And that's all super helpful and interesting too, where it's a little bit high-end, but really in-depth running form type measurement all through pressure and the gyroscope and the accelerometer.

Interesting. So you're saving lives and helping people run better.

We're trying to do a little bit of it all.

Okay, before we get into some of the practical application with Jeff on running and wearables, I want to talk about my sponsorship with Run John Gee, John Gee Running Apparel. They've been a partner of mine for six months now. I'm loving their gear. In fact, just the other day, I went out for a run with all of their stuff on, had a Reno T on with their Trail Half-Tights with their Belaga John Gee sock collaboration, as well as some of their lightweight gloves because it was below 50 degrees, and I finally got to pull out some gloves, which was amazing. So I had an amazing run in their gear in beautiful temperatures and came back feeling great. But let's talk about John Gee again. They're a running apparel company. 2% of all of their revenue goes to support water projects all around the world. Their gear is great. It's functional and it's long-lasting. They have a five-year run everywhere guarantee. So if something happens, you can get it replaced in that window with no questions asked. I want you to go to their site, runjohngee.com or johngee.com, and check out their stuff. You can use my code rogue15, R-O-G-U-E-1-5 for 15% off your order. You can use that code once. You can use it twice. You can share it with your friends. Go get your Run John Gee gear and enjoy those runs starting today. Okay, let's get back to my conversation with Jeff and James. All right, so I want to go back and kind of go by type of device here for a minute or at least category of measurement, which I know that all these wearables are kind of converging on being able to do all the things. But for the most part, there's still different silos of things from, for example, GPS watches to then more health-based trackers and things like that, like Aura and Whoop. Let's start with the GPS realm. And I remember my very first GPS watch. It was a Timex. I think it was, I was mid-20s. So we're going on 20 years ago. It was a Timex device that had a shoulder or a upper arm band pod thing that you wore. And then it somehow tracked it on your watch from there. That was my very first experience with it. I remember discarding it almost right away. I got it for like a birthday gift and didn't enjoy wearing the big hefty pod on my bicep. So I got rid of it right away. And obviously then we progressed to like the brick, you know, candy bar, garment style devices. And now, you know, we just got basic wrist watches that do it all. So it's been quite an evolution. But in that realm, when it comes to measuring pace and distance and time and things like that, how are we doing? It seems like we're in a pretty good place there.

We're getting better. We're doing pretty good. We're getting better. I certainly see it evolve over the last eight years. And it's the combination of things. The sensors have gotten better. There's more. So we should talk just like a little bit at the basic level, just lay some foundation here. I think at this point, if you've purchased a high-end GPS watch recently, you'll have noticed that there's GPS, but there's also this thing called GLONASS, G-L-O-N-A-S-S. There's other satellite systems out there. And so we've seen the adoption of more satellite systems, and at least here in the US, we've adopted kind of like as a Kleenex, the GPS, like everything is just GPS, but it's ultimately this kind of like dual band, dual device or dual satellite system or multi-satellite system here. So that's sort of been an evolving thing that eight years ago, 10 years ago, you only had GPS, and that was a good thing. So you've seen better kind of like layouts of terrain as we've gotten better like imagery of the Earth and in and of itself. The basic mathematical formulae that we use to filter GPS signals has continued to evolve. And then yes, the sensors have become more powerful. Now there's limits on the level of power that these things can admit because of certification levels and like kind of dangers of exposure to human beings. So everything that we're talking about here has presumably gone through the safe level of certification. And of course, you've got better batteries and better power density. So as your batteries have improved and your power density has improved, you can crank up the signal more, you can crank up these things more, and you can take more samples within a given period of time. So all these things have allowed us to get a little bit better. And we've also learned how to do things like manage really challenging and harsh conditions, like tall buildings that are constantly blocking satellites and stuff like that through there. But things that are interesting places that have really helped push the basic research along have been rideshare companies that publish their research because they ultimately need to know if they're going to pick somebody up, which corner of a busy intersection that person is on. Are they on the Northwest? Or are they on the East? Because you missed that corner, you've got a circle block, and then the person's like, nope, I'm canceling. So huge investments into those areas. So yeah, better sensors, more powerful sensors, better satellite systems, more satellite systems, and better just general mathematics have helped help these things come along. But I think probably where you're ultimately going to get to is, well, how is it compared to the thing measured on race day? You're never going to, at least I doubt in my lifetime, we're going to perfectly emulate what to expect on race day. And that's a whole nother set of conversations too, because that's just a different challenge altogether.

Well, I mean, it's the classic thing. Well, that course was long or short or, well, hold on. If it's a certified course measured by the appropriate certification standards, then your watch is going to be inaccurate, but the course is in fact accurate. And you may still run longer because you're not properly managing the tangents, but that's a separate conversation.

Exactly right. I mean, that's it. You can't run. It's virtually impossible to run the course exactly right, unless you're running on a lane of a track and you're sticking to that lane. But yeah, it's really hard. You can't do it. So your watch is going to be off. And so I think this kind of gets back, ultimately, to the art and science. You need to have a good feel for what nine minute a mile feels like, or five minutes per kilometer feels like. Because if you don't have a good feel for that come race day, when you're maybe at a point where your satellite hasn't, you haven't quite grabbed the signal the way you expect to, or you're running through a challenging area, you need to know what that feels like. Because if you start pushing too hard too early in a race, we all know what that does. That's how come they ain't good.

Well, we just had the Chicago Marathon, the perfect marathon to really highlight this challenge, because you go through a tunnel in mile one, you're in dense buildings through much of the race, and your GPS may or may not be accurate at certain points, and or it may not be accurate the whole time, you know, in the case of a handful of people, and so you actually do have to rely on how does it feel, and by the way, if I'm lapping manually, what is my time on the measured course for the measured distances that are available?

That's right. That's ultimately what matters, too. It's like that's what you're doing it for. If you're an outcome-based trainer, then yeah, that's ultimately what it's about. And also, don't forget that there's a lot of companies out there that are in the business of making training fun and interesting. And you may find that depending on which platform you're viewing your training data in, that your results may not all be the exact same from one to another to another. Because what might equal engagement on a platform might not look the exact same way as performance on race day. And that's okay, right? Because we all want different things out of those things. But that's why it gets back to it. It's like what's ultimately important is what the split says on race day. And that's what you got to learn to know and use that to kind of calibrate against each other as you're going for that ultimate goal.

That last point is interesting because I think it's one that people forget, which is that the way one app interprets the data to create output on your watch, Strava versus Garmin Connect, for example, they might be different. They might be interpreting the data differently, and you might actually see slightly different things on each.

That's right, yeah. And it's all dialed differently. And now, if you're probably... I don't know exactly how Strava works, but my presumption is that they're pulling in the data exactly as it says from Garmin. They're respecting that. But if you were to, say, log natively, track through your phone application and do that there, and then also simultaneously track on your Garmin watch and then simultaneously track on the Map My Run app, you're going to get three different measurements. That's just the way it is, right? Because they all do things a little bit differently, and they all use different sets of math, and there's no agency, there's no part of the government that says, here's your GPS formula. Everybody apply it this way, and if you don't, we're going to find you. It works that way for privacy and security and things like that, which is good because we need that level of privacy and protection on that front, but not when it comes to GPS.

Yeah, or applications in ways that might impact life, like cars or something like that. They're going to have a standard that might be subject to find if not followed. Okay, so then given that, given that we know, look, I mean, I think the way I try to tell people is like, look, your watch is not accurate. You have to accept that it's not accurate. It is going to be directionally correct, maybe really accurate, but it's got limitations. And you have to accept that and understand what those limitations are so that when you're applying what you see on your wrist, you're applying in a way that's helpful versus too rigidly. So if you were to give people general tips on using a GPS watch, pace and distance and all that, what would you say are the, you know, do's and don'ts?

Yeah, I think that's really, really key. First thing, if you're working with a coach, first and foremost, listen to the coach. That's the most important thing is use your information to have a more, use your day to have a more informed conversation with your coach. And instead of saying, you know, a coach, you did it wrong. My watch said this. I know you told me this, but my watch said this. So therefore, whatever the course is that you, you created for us is wrong, and I'm right. That's just like, you've got to trust the process. For any of it to work, first and foremost, you've got to trust the process. So, you know, when it comes to it, yeah, like, yeah, I think it is helpful to, look, you know, if you're trying to track your weekly training load, it's great for that. Like if you need to know your overall mileage, it's great for that. If you need to know kind of roughly your paces for whatever reason, maybe it's go faster or slower, it's great for that. Like if you need to push yourself and you need like some maybe objective feedback on days when you're tired, say you're in an intense training block and you're in like a three week, you're in a mesocycle where you're like, I need to like push myself really hard here where your days, where your legs feel like lead, but for whatever reason you need to push to some point, like it's helpful for that to like keep you honest. It's also helpful in the opposite direction of like on days when you're feeling like great, and you need to like lay back a little bit because maybe you're tapering or something like that. It's like good to help push it the other direction, in my opinion. But that's ultimately, I think, where it's at is it's like, it's an input to all the other kind of, you know, it's one of many inputs into the overall kind of training formula.

With a very important one to never forget, which is how you feel. Don't forget to listen to your body, which is so hard.

Absolutely.

Okay, let's talk about heart rate for a minute. A lot of these devices, GPS watches and things, have the optical heart rate measured from the wrist. And I just went on a rant about this recently, I think on this podcast, maybe it was on our other Renegade podcast, that I am finding as a coach that it is more often, if it's out of whack, it's more often inaccurate than it is accurate. And people are putting way too much stock in it. And so when it's giving them something that looks funny relative to how they feel, they're asking me, well, what's wrong? What's going on? My heart rate is telling me it's 170, and I'm running an easy run and I feel fine. I'm like, well, most likely that watch isn't accurate. How you feel is probably accurate. So go with that. So give us a little bit on that. How much can we trust the optical heart rate on a wrist?

Yeah, it's a floated question there, Chris. How much can you trust anything? No, yeah, I think, you know, it's the same story as with GPS. It's gotten better. You know, the heart rate uses, the optical heart rate uses this thing. It's a great word. Photoplethysmography. It's like a $5 word. Throw it out at a party. You'll lose friends instantaneously. But yeah, it's in short called PPG. What it does is it sends light into your skin, and it actually looks for the actual like pulsation of blood through your vasculature. So obviously as you have a bolus of blood moving through your vasculature, it looks bigger like when we imagine a snake swallowing something in a cartoon sense of like this really comedic ball of whatever moving through the snake's body. That's literally what it's looking for. It shoots that in there, and then it reflects it back. We've done a lot of different work around what wavelength is perfect for this skin tone and all these various things, which is why you see watches now that have different colored lights underneath them because they're trying to do different things with it. People try different things too, like just using these really small jolts of electricity that move through and they're kind of picked up on another side, and that's measuring kind of similar type stuff. It's more like this electrodermal type thing. And then all down to sort of how tight the device is around your wrist and all that type of good stuff there. So yeah, there's a lot of factors that kind of impact it. If you're dehydrated, you're going to see different levels of availability and so on and so forth. Yeah, and ultimately some devices have reputations for being better than others, and that's just kind of the way it is too. If you want the best heart rate from a wearable device, you've got to still wear a chest strap and make sure that the contacts are moistened up, especially on a cold, dry day. But that's all basic stuff. What you're ultimately kind of getting down to though, it's like, how much do I try? If I'm supposed to do a threshold run and I need it to be at this point, and I think that that's like a zone four kind of thing, and that's like 170 for me, how much do I get it in there? And it's like, yeah, I think it's helpful. If you've had good reliability with your device, and you know day in and day out, I get pretty good stuff here. And I can kind of feel, I can use it to dial in, but ultimately, if you're not feeling it on a particular day, it can become as dangerous as pace where you're just using it dogmatically, and you're like, oh man, if I don't hit this pace, I'm not going to do it on race day. That's just not true. Training is way more dynamic than that, and then the actual individual point of a single workout is not as important as the broader whole. So you have to kind of look at those things from a holistic picture and take a step back and go, yeah, you know what, I'm not feeling it today, or these numbers just don't pass the sniff test for me. I'm seeing 220 on here. It's like, that doesn't make sense. Or I'm working pretty hard and I'm seeing 80 or 90 on here. That doesn't make sense. Maybe just forget about it that day and move on and go from it from that standpoint there. No one wants to be like the Michael Scott in the office following the GPS from the lake.

That's not what we're here for.

If it doesn't make sense, don't trust it for that day.

Right. Yeah, ultimately, you have to still listen to your body. And yeah, if the data from a relative sense, and typically, I think with risk-based stuff, heart rate, then to me, if you have relatively good data, day to day, that correlates with your perceived effort, then that can be helpful. And you may also find there are certain trends about when it might be inaccurate. For me, when it's cold and windy day, typically, my risk-based heart rate isn't that accurate. It'll be really high. And sometimes, by the way, this stuff will sync with your cadence, as some weird byproduct of the algorithms as well. And so if you're seeing 170, 180, then maybe that's what's happening.

Well, yeah. And think about that cold and windy day. What's happening is when it's cold and when it's windy, your body, physiologically, is trying to manage the core temperature. And what is the best way to move heat around the body is blood. And when it's cold, you're like, okay, I need to move more blood, this warming element, into my core and keep it into my core. So that means there's less blood happening out at the extremities, which is a harder... We talk about the snake eating the thing. It's a harder signal to pick up when that element that's moving through the vasculature is smaller and those pieces there. So yeah, I mean, there's a lot of physiology. But don't get me wrong. Obviously, I've worked in the space for a while at this point. I obviously trust it and I believe in it. And I have parts of it that I find really valuable. So for me, just getting over a cold recently, it was so nice to be able to look at my heart rate variability data while I was sleeping and my skin temperature while I'm sleeping and my respiration rate and my heart rate while I'm sleeping and going, oh, I'm actually getting over this. And today was the first day I went for a run since last Tuesday because I'd been fighting something. And today, truthfully, I might not have gone out and done it because still I don't want to get over this thing. But I had two days where it was like, oh, all of my signs look great. I should get out and do something. And I went out and I was like, great, I'm so glad I did that. And so at that point, that's where the device signals can be really nice is when you're trying to actually monitor or measure something more globally from that standpoint. Again, on heart rate with these things like heart rate and heart rate variability, maybe you're supposed to be in a really intense training block and your coach is like, hey, we really need to be pushing it for this mesocycle. Well, yeah, you should see your heart rate variability going down and you should see your heart rate while you're resting going up. If you're not seeing that, you're probably not doing enough work and you probably need to do a little more work. And so that's really nice objective signals that help kind of validate something that we're not quite sure or trusting ourselves. I think that's really the beauty of it is pairing those two things together.

Which is a good segue to these more health tracking type wearables. So what are you using to track HRV and overnight heart rate and temperature?

This is not a product endorsement, but I use Aura and I've used Aura for about three years now. I adopted it during the pandemic like so many other people did.

As did I. I wore it for I think about a year and a half during the pandemic. I no longer wear it, but that's a separate story. So Aura and Whoop are the two big players in that space where you're tracking overnight HRV, heart rate, body temperature, sleep cycles in theory. So from a wearable perspective in that area, what's the good and the bad?

I think if you're just getting into becoming aware of the importance of recovery and things like that, it's really been a renaissance of the recovery element of training. It's become very popularized. And I think I agree with the hype. It's very important. And I studied sleep at Under Armour for a couple of years. I had a really great research relationship with Johns Hopkins, with a couple of researchers there. And I just really became aware of the importance of sleep and recovery. And you can do a lot of the sleep recovery hygiene stuff without a tracker, because it's really basic and boring stuff. It's like go to bed at the same time every night, wake up at the same time every morning, and have a good routine before you go to bed, which we all have heard at this point. I'm not going to recap all those things, but don't be on your phone super late. Don't do stuff that's stressful right before bed. Don't make sure you have a cold, dark, quiet environment sleeping. All that stuff there. But that will get you like 80% of the way there. You can really get things dialed in. Once you've kind of figured out what your sleep needs are, and so you use a device like Aura for a while or some other sleep tracker, you kind of figure out what your needs are, you've kind of got it figured out for the most part. And a lot of times it's not that important. Until you go and get sick, like the use case I was just providing, which at that point I was like, man, I'm so glad I had this thing, because I've got a really good sense of where my body is right now and I knew how to lay off when I was starting to feel bad, and then also when it was time to start going again, when it was time to go again. So I think there's really good value in that. And if anything, the wearables have just made us all more aware of the importance of sleep just from the general hype that comes with the development and release of new products that are well adopted. So yeah, I look at it both ways. Like, is it helpful? Yes, absolutely. It's most helpful when you're stressing your body or you're putting yourself through kind of like dynamic elements. But if you're living a general healthy life and you know what you've figured out, what your bedtime needs to be and what your wake time needs to be, then you're probably good most of the time.

Yeah, and I remember when I got COVID during the pandemic, wearing my aura, it gave me the first indicator that something was wrong well before I even started to feel sick or knew that I had COVID. My heart rate variability tanked, my respiratory rate went up, body temperature slightly elevated, resting heart rate elevated overnight. And in fact, I was actually a part of a study that helped correlate all those things. But really interesting. And it told me both when I was getting sick and then it told me when I was ready to resume running because those levels had normalized again, as you're talking about, which is really powerful. The downside ultimately for me was that there was a period of time when I was wearing it where I was struggling sleeping for what I found out later was what ended up being a nutrient deficiency that was preventing me from being able to sleep well and was able to get that solved. But during that time, it was just giving me bad data. I mean, it was giving me bad scores. So it became a self-fulfilling prophecy, essentially. I think it became something that got in my head a little bit that made it worse to be wearing it and tracking it for me to be able to actually work through that period of time as I was managing it.

Yeah, I mean, that's a very real thing. And, you know, it does get in your head. And sleep is this weird thing. Like, our entire life is something that's active, where you need to run harder. Well, you, like, run harder. You need to run faster. You run harder. It's like you just put more effort into it. And sleep is the exact opposite. The more effort you put into it, the worse it is. You just have to, like, let it wash over you. You just have to somehow, like, stop everything else. And it's like the absence of things that allow sleep to really, like, come on to you. And, yeah, when you are in this cycle, you get really like, oh, man, like, my bedtime needs to be 10 o'clock. And you miss it, and you're just like, oh, shit. Like, there's no way I'm going to... Now, my whole thing's shot. It's just ruined. Like, yeah, you've got to have this, like, healthy thing. And, yeah, I went through a cycle this summer where I stopped wearing my... and stopped tracking things for a month because it was just like, I need to, like, have some healthy balance with. And I recommend people do that. Like, they have some time where they do it. But, you know, the adoption of it and bringing it on is so helpful. I mean, I'm a person that enjoys an adult beverage or two. And, you know, living in the great city of Austin, Texas, there is no shortage of adult beverages. And I learned how important or how big of an impact, you know, alcohol has on my sleep. And I've since cut back the amount that I drink, especially, you know, during training periods and things like that, where it's like, I just know that it's really going to wreck me. I might feel okay the next day, but you look at your numbers and you're like, okay. And you kind of dial that stuff in and those other pieces there. So it's really helpful from, like, the exploratory side of it and kind of learning what your body can and can't do well, and especially as your body changes over the years and those pieces there.

One thing I want to emphasize with those devices, at least from my experience, is that the raw data is so much more important and helpful than the algorithm interpretation of that raw data, because you'll get recovery scores and sleep scores and all these scores. And while those might be helpful and directionally correct, I think the most important stuff you get from those devices, Aura and Whoop, is the raw information, because those scores are just algorithms, just like Garmin has its algorithms about when you're recovered, that may or may not be that useful. And so speak to the algorithms that lay on top of the data.

Yeah, yeah, these sort of like applied metrics, these sort of like insight-driven metrics. Yeah, it goes back, we were kind of talking about this a little bit earlier on, as yeah, there's this general direction. The companies have a broad user base, and they know what's happening, and they're trying to give, they have a good sense of what's happening at a population level, and they're thus giving information and insights back at a population level up until this point. I think, again, with things like AI, like whoops, AI coach, you might see that changing a little bit as things get more personalized. But as it exists today, all in all, if you're in a tough training block, your wearable is going to be telling you, you should really back off here because it looks like your heart rate variability is really going down, and your resting heart rate is going up, and you're like, oh, I should die. But your coach is like, no, we're in a three-week training cycle. I feel like this has been my example throughout of this mythical three-week hard training cycle. But it is true. Where you are in the middle of it, and it's like, you know what, actually the fact that your watch is giving that, it's like this anti-signal that you're like, okay, good, I'm feeling that. But yeah, as you come out of it, your coach is telling you, hey, you need to rest and recover, and then you're not seeing that, then that maybe is like something else to like look into. But yeah, there's points where you should put the wearable aside and not look at it. And I think it's probably the most important one is when you're tapering for a race, because you don't want anything to tell you, you know what, your sleep's not good. And there's been studies after study after study that has shown you can have really terrible sleep days leading up to a race, the night before a race, it really doesn't matter, has no performance on, no impact on your performance. And you've got to let that be okay, because it's so hard to sleep the night before that key performance. We've all been there. If you're not tossing and turning on it, you're probably like, maybe you're not that excited about it, or who knows, maybe there's these mythical people out there that sleep perfectly the night before a key performance. But yeah, those are the key areas. You've got to understand what the intent of a training cycle is and where you should be pushing and not pushing. And if your device is telling you one thing for or against that, then you've got to reconcile that with what your coach is. And then, yeah, when it comes to tapering, take the thing off. Don't look at it. Don't do any of that stuff. And I kind of generally feel that way about GPS too when you're tapering. It's like, just chill out. Don't do that. It's all done. It's all there. It's ready. Just focus on...

That's good advice because it can get in your head. Ultimately, it can get in your head, and it's not that useful because whether you... I mean, one of the things I think is a mythology about HRV data, for example, is just this idea that if it's low, you shouldn't do something hard. Well, not necessarily. You know, it depends on those variables you're talking about because, look, your body can perform. You know, that means your body is actually at a heightened sense of stress or alert. You know, it's ready for the fight. It's ready to flight or fight. And so you can get a result with a low HRV.

Oh, absolutely. I mean, look, you're probably going to be a wreck. Like, if you are, you know, an NFL quarterback or something like that, and you've got high HRV the day before a big match, like, yeah, you should because it's a big match. You should be like in a state of heightened stress because you got to be ready the next day.

You're going to war.

Going, yeah, yeah. So, yeah, low HRV, normal, you can get your result. Now, that means that you do have to recover on the other side, though. You know, you can't just then go to the next hard thing right away without coming, you know, letting that rebuild. Okay, so as we start to wrap this up, and I love the arc of your journey from sort of science to, you know, the practical science kind of coming together with your coaching and having to learn the balance between the art and the science and then getting back to the science part, but then also in another context, learning the art and the science. So if we were to give, you know, a few key takeaways for listeners here about running and wearables and how they use them in their training, give me two, two overarching takeaways here.

I think, you know, we've touched on all these, so I'm not going to throw out anything new into the mix. I think it's important as an input to reconcile what you're expecting to have from your training plan. Like, you really need to understand the intent of your training plan and particularly, you know, the phases of a training plan and going, how should I be, if I'm in a recovery phase, how should I be managing life in a recovery phase? Like, that's really helpful to kind of like have some of that. But, you know, don't treat it as dogma and don't try to replace it and don't try to like take it to your coach and use it as a point to like call your coach out for being a liar. None of that stuff is helpful. We've got to ultimately kind of trust the plan. And so, you know, I'd say the directionality side of it. And then two, you know, use it to like explore your body and what works and what doesn't work, especially with things like the recovery trackers. Like, you know, if you like to, like you're like me and you like to have a, you know, a beer or a cocktail like before bed, and you're like, oh, I'm not sure how this is doing. Like, it's really helpful for that kind of like journey of defining what it is you need and monitoring those things there. So because we're all different, we're all so, so different. And if you're taking on a new training style or you're taking on a new form of training, whatever it might be, you're throwing weightlifting into the mix all of a sudden, like use it to explore that, or you've got a new diet, use it to explore that and kind of take it there. So that's kind of how I would say it's like, use it for exploration and then take it sort of directionally and not apply it dogmatically.

Here, here. Love that.

Yeah, no, I love it too. And I think you had brought up trusting yourself earlier, like kind of two questions ago. And I think it's interesting. I think people approach it dogmatically. When we approach it dogmatically, it's usually connected to not trusting ourselves. It's almost like there's, I see it with nutrition plans too, every now and then you come across an athlete that they want it spelled out 100% from their running coach of like exactly what to eat, when, where and why. And you know that there's like a mindfulness layer. Or I think what I'm going to hear is just like, there is a level of trust in yourself that it requires. It almost speaks to confidence. I say it about the training plans too, that when I handed Ashley the spreadsheet, it's like the spreadsheet serves you, you don't serve it. The watch serves you, you don't serve it. Have you observed that in your coaching experience? I'm fairly certain the answer is yes, but how do you speak to it? Like I value how you think as much as what you think. That's why you're a good friend and remained a good friend for a long time. So what would you say to it on that how to think perspective and specifically on the being able to trust yourself piece?

Yeah, it's a good point, because it's way easier to just look at a spreadsheet and follow it like a recipe. It's way easier to take signals from a, you know, interpretive signals from a wearable and just follow it. The hard part is actually taking the time to do the work, to really understand what your body is. You talk about that a lot at Rogue, it's like, listen to your body. But if you take a step back and you go, what does that even mean? You're new to Rogue, what does it mean to listen to your body? What is my body supposed to be telling me right now? And that's the hard part. You have to ask questions. You have to come back to your coach and be like, okay, you're telling me this, but what am I supposed to be feeling right now? Oh, okay, it's supposed to be hard. Well, how hard? My legs are supposed to be hurting. In what way? I'm supposed to be out of breath to what degree? I'm tired this morning. Well, how tired does tired mean? I think that's really where it's at. It's like anything else in life. If you're going through therapy or you're going through whatever, the self-work is the hard part there with it. Journaling is not easy. It takes a lot of work to do that. And you've got to go do that, and you've got to be willing to lean into that. And once you do that, these other things can help support it. But it's my philosophy that we fall back onto the training plan, we fall back onto the wearables, because it's simple. Who doesn't want simple? But simple is not the good part. You've got to really actually learn and lean in and understand it.

And be willing to make mistakes in the process. I think part of it, you know, as I've talked about in an episode about listening to your intuition is listen to your gut, listen to your intuition, make a decision, adjust based on it, and then on the other side decide, hey, what did I learn? Did I do that right? Was that the right call? Or did I learn that that was the wrong call? And maybe I need to recalibrate my own response to these internal cues. And I think the same is true with what you see from your data. If something doesn't look right, it probably isn't. Use your intuition to trust it or not, and then learn from it on the other side, and it's an ongoing evolution. Unfortunately, all the devices are evolving in a more accurate direction, but even still, our best pace and distance, you know, pace and distance are probably the best and most accurate versions of what we can get from a device wearable as a runner, and yet still, it can be inaccurate. So just know that and respond accordingly. Well, this has been awesome, Jeff. I really appreciate the conversation, the practicality of it, and also just the meandering through your really, really fascinating career. And if anybody wants to be in Austin and go take Jeff out for a beer, it's even more fascinating to dig into this stuff over an adult beverage. So we'll have to do that again soon, Jeff. But thanks for coming on.

It was a blast. Thanks, everybody. Appreciate the time.

Jeff, I want to tie into the end what I started with, but just like I was excited about Noah Khan, and I was even worried if I'm too excited, I might get disappointed. He over-delivered. Jeff, I was excited to chat with you today. I was nervous, and you over-delivered, my brother. You're the Noah Khan of the day.

Wow, that's too high a praise. I thought we were also doing a music podcast there for a little bit.

Yeah.

I appreciate that.

Awesome. Well, thank you, Jeff, and hopefully we'll see you soon. There you go. Jeff Knight on Running and Wearables. Thanks to him for joining us. Thanks to James for co-hosting with me. Thanks to all of you for listening. As always, you can check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Twitter, Instagram or Facebook at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.