Hey, everybody, it is episode 16 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is Chris, and as always, Steve is joining me. Hey, Steve.

Hello, people.

And we have not one but two very special guests today. Jen Harney, who's our training director and coach for TeamRogue in Cedar Park. Welcome, Jen.

Thank you, Chris.

We have Mallory Brooks with us, who is our trail coach at Rogue and also the race director for Spectrum Trail Races.

Hello.

Welcome, Mallory. So, we are going to be talking about a very, very important topic, which is women and running today. And the realities that women face as they run and train that might be different than men. We're talking about this for a couple reasons. One, because men need to hear it too, so they can better understand and empathize or at least sympathize with some of the challenges that women face that men just don't face. So, for the men out there listening, please don't shut it off. Force yourself to listen. There may be some awkward things that we talk about that are uncomfortable for you, including me, but I want you to stick it out. This is for men and women. Secondly, for women, a lot of these things that we're going to cover, including some of the women's health related issues, is they just aren't talked about very often and certainly not talked about in an open forum on a podcast. So we're going to dig into it and not be afraid to cover anything. So with that as our brief intro to our main topic, we're going to jump into, as we always do, some current events with Running. This past weekend, we had the first event in the Rogue Trail Series, the race we call The Maze out at Walnut Creek Park. It's the only venue that has been a venue since the very beginning, right Steve?

That's correct. It's the first race we put on. The Rogue Trail Series precedes Rogue Training Systems or Rogue Running, so yeah. And in fact, Rogue Running is named after the Rogue Trail Series. I had wished that I hadn't stolen my own thunder for the race, but we kept both going and I think it served us pretty well in terms of people knowing the kind of race we put on. Mallory likes to give me a little shit for putting on a quick and dirty trail race, but we have a lot of fun doing it and we had probably our best turnout this year and we also had some amazing races, which I'm assuming we're going to talk a little bit about.

We did. We had over 300 runners out there competing in both the 10K and the 30K. We'll start with the 30K. On the men's side, it was much more spread out. The winner was Moses Luvano, who's a former SFA, Stephen F. Austin collegiate runner, and Steve and I both saw him after the first 5K and thought he was going to blow his own wheels because he went out really hard and definitely took it to the field, but held on strong. Michael Kervosh, who finished second, who won the Rogue Trail Series last year and won the Maze last year, ended up 2 minutes back. He started to gain a little bit at the very end as Moses ran out of gas, but he had too much to make up. We had Josh Beckham, who races with the Spectrum Trail Team, came in third to finish out the podium and of course, our man Paul Terranova. In doing this, he did a four hour run that day. He started with 90 minute warm up and then raced the race to finish fourth in a very impressive time.

Holding hands with Troy Bertram.

So that race was impressive because Moses and Michael just went out hard. Moses finished in a very, very solid 2.13, which for 30K on the trail is no joke.

Yeah, they had pretty warm weather. It was so much nicer on Saturday than it was on Sunday. The humidity was pretty tough. When we went out and marked the course, we were out there 3.30 or 4 o'clock in the morning and it was drizzling and nasty. So one of the funniest things I saw in the race, Moses on his second loop comes running through this twisty turny section that's relatively new that the mountain bikers out have created out there. And I noticed that he stopped and put something on the ground. I didn't know what the heck he was doing and I look over and it's his insoles. It was the first time he wore these ultra trail shoes. And he didn't realize that all insoles pretty much need a little bit of imprintation in order for them to work for you. And he had a little... Who was the marathoner who had his insoles fly out in the middle of the race?

It was the Kenyan guy.

Yeah, the Kenyan guy. Yeah, he... Moses had a little bit of that. He actually stopped, took his shoes off, pulled the insoles out and set them on the ground. And after the race, he said to me, yeah, do you know where those are? I said, yeah, they're actually five minutes down the trail. Let me go grab them for you. So he ran out of his own insoles. So there you go. He had a great race. And I'm pretty sure Michael was a little shocked at that. He won last year, hands down. And I remember watching Michael run that race last year. And I looked over at Mallory and I said, is this guy real? I mean, I'm not even sure. He didn't look like a runner. He wears long shorts and he wears basketball shorts.

He didn't stop for water.

Did not have trail shoes on.

He looks like he's like he took no hand out of the basketball court.

Yeah, it took no handhelds. Did nothing. Yeah.

And he got beat this time.

He did.

He was gaining at the end. So congrats to Moses, Michael and Josh. That podium, on the women's side of the 30K, TeamRogue member Amy Baker won going away. It was actually an interesting race, really close through the halfway point through 15K. I was at the water station and there was four women within about a minute, maybe even less of each other at that point. Amy was running second coming out of that water station, but she pretty much blew everybody away on the last half of the course and won by close to five minutes. So Amy Baker, TeamRogue member one, Sam Godbold and Taylor Clark finished out the podium on the women's side. Also impressive results.

Super happy to see Amy back rolling. She's been dealing with some injury issues and she was super happy to be able to get 18 miles worth of work in and to get the win to boot, so congrats to her and congrats to all those. 30K isn't that long a race, but for some reason out there with the three loop bottle, it can get a little challenging mentally for people to manage. They get a little wonky that last loop no matter how fast or slow they're running. So congrats to those folks. You know, the 10K, it's a different beast. You have to run so fast to stay in the race and the course is tough to run fast on. This one's better to run fast on than any of the other ones we have, but it's not an easy format, 10K on a trail.

And the 10Ks were close. If you look at the men's podium, top three were separated by seven seconds. Through the 5K, they were running back to back to back through the aid station. And so congrats to Joey. I'm going to mispronounce his last name, Prisibilla.

Prisibilla, I believe is how you say it.

Mike Threadgold got two seconds back, and then Paul Rademacher, who trains in my group, The Morning Show, rounded out the podium on the men's side. So it was super close. They came through in exactly that order through the 5K aid station, and it stayed that way. But Paul said he took it out in the lead and ended up getting past about mile two by those two guys and then just didn't have anything left to kick them down at the end.

Yeah, it was at the halfway point. We were standing there, Chris, and it was amazing to see them all. There were two seconds separating each of them going through the 5K. And then to see three of them almost with the exact same positioning coming with 600 meters to go or so was pretty cool. You could tell that Joey had the win. He could tell he was sort of holding ground and no one else was able to make a move on him, really. Paul, over that last 600, was definitely getting a little tight. I was proud of him for holding it all together. But it was a fun race to watch.

He did well. That was his second race in as many weeks. He yarded in the 5K last weekend, so I was impressed that he had so much to give in the 10K there. On the women's side for the 10K, four seconds separated the top two, and we had a Rogue podium sweep there with Kate Barrett, former Rogue AC athlete who trains with us. Kristen Tucker who trains with Steve at TeamRogue, and then Katie Gwenn who trains with Steve at TeamRogue. From Mondo Sports, rounded out the podium. So clean sweep for the Rogues on the women's 10K.

Yeah, and Kate went out fast in this race. Sam Labrie who writes a blog called Armadillo Running did a little interview with Kate to discuss how she ran her race and how the race went. She said she knew she had to get out fast. I don't think she really expected to see Kristen on her tail since Kristen was running her very first trail race of her life and had really only run her first trail runs of her life with us up at Camp Elevation recently in the last two weeks. She had decided in a rather short order that she was suddenly a trail runner. But they had a great race and you know, Kates, Wiley Kate, the veteran, definitely knew how to place her and position herself to keep the win and had it pretty much in check the whole way. Although she did mention that at four miles or so, if Kristen had come around her, she wasn't sure she could hold her off. So it's good for athletes to know and recognize that even if someone looks invincible in front of you, they're always beatable.

She was running scared, she said, Kate.

Yes, it's the best position to be in.

But she held on. So congrats to those three ladies, Kate, Kristen and Katie.

You know, also we had one of our guests who ran a 10K loop out there as part of a relay, Jen Harney, ran I think would have been the third fastest or fourth fastest time of the day solo completely by herself. She's sort of coming back from her marathon, but shout out to Jen for a good solid effort. Sometimes you got to look deep down in the results to see some of that stuff. But I saw her coming around the corner at one point, and she was definitely hammering. I could tell she was running for something more than just an easy run. So, congrats.

Yeah, I watched them all come through.

I knew when...

She knew where she was.

She wanted to compete.

I did until I passed Chris at the 5K, and then I looked down at my watch and saw like 930 and was like, never mind.

Just don't hurt yourself.

Anytime Jen steps out on the starting line, you know she's going to give it. So, congrats to all those podium finishers from the maze and of course to everybody who finished. Those that might be interested in looking at the rest of the races in the series, we've got the Tangle coming up, Flat Creek Ranch on April 30th, and then the Ranch at Reveille Ranch on May 28th, Memorial Day Sunday. So, those are definitely more challenging if you like some terrain.

But they're still super beginner-friendly. The environment is really relaxed and laid back. The routes are extremely well-marked, maybe too well-marked, but extremely well-marked, and I think that's one of the major concerns people have, who are roadies who might be looking at tapping into the trail a little bit, and maybe they'll get turned around or lost, and that's certainly not going to happen at one of our races. So, super beginner-friendly, and if anybody's thinking about jumping into them, holler at us, and we'll give you any updates or any info you need about it.

Yep, you can find out all of that information at roguetrailseries.com, or you can link to it from our main site, rogrunning.com.

I also feel like they're worried about getting injured, and I'd like to point out we had a pretty clean first race.

Yes, no injuries.

It's certain. Knock on plastic, but we had a bad track record last year. We had someone who got seriously injured, so we were very happy to have everybody come through cleanly.

She came back.

Yeah, she does. Oh, yeah, for sure.

Yeah, after breaking her leg.

Yes.

Our worst injury at this race was a girl that tripped over the start line at the start and ran the entire thing with massively bloody knees.

And she was mad at herself. She was embarrassed and mad. That's Melissa Moulman. She's been in Rogue programs in the past. I think we were happy to see her finish and have at least a decent run of it, even though I know she's probably still nursing some wounds there.

So that's the Rogue Trail Series. Now, the other thing that we need to talk about, and this is going to get back to our mission, Steve, to educate the casual fan about what they need to be knowing about their sport, and that's that the greatest foot race on the planet happened this past weekend in World Cross-Country Championships in Uganda. Before we dive into the results, tell us, Steve, why it's the greatest race on the planet.

Because milers will race marathoners, 5Kers will race 10Kers, and everybody will be running the same race on the same day at the same time and therefore crowning a champion. Cross-Country in the United States as well as around the world is sort of a formative sport where people first come to running. High schoolers and junior high kids mostly find their way to cross-country at some point in time and it's such a beautiful and amazing race. One of the coolest things about it this year was they decided for the first time to lengthen the women's race and shorten the men's race, so they both were running 10K at the same time, which to me is kudos to the IAAF for finally recognizing there needs to be no separation and no difference between the men's and women's races. And I think the women's results will become more and more impactful because people will be able to make comparisons and contrasting where they are positioned equally, just like we do in road races and marathons and things like that. That's been a very big frustration of mine for many years as I coach collegially and even in high school. It's like so frustrating. The women used to run 6K and the men would run 10K, or the women would run 8K and the men would run 12K at International. And it just never made sense to me why we're running 10Ks and 5Ks in the Olympics and the marathon, but we're not running it together at the same, not going to run together in the same race, but we're going to run the same distance. So that's super cool. And the races were, the races had a lot of drama for sure.

Yes, and that's the beauty of CROSS, is that the clock doesn't matter. It is about the race. We'll start with the women's side this time. And I think you could argue that the Kenyan women had the most dominant cross-country performance ever. They had not only the top three runners to sweep the podium, but they also had the next three as well. So first through sixth, all Kenya. And of course they ran away with the team win with the perfect score, because the top four runners score in this format. So they dominated the women's race. And Cheptie, also the winner, the female winner, she's also the Kenya National Champion, has a bright future. She's fairly young and is someone to look for as you look to perhaps the road half or full distances.

Yeah, historically, both the men's and women's side, the Kenyans are the dominant force at the World Cross-Country Championships. They have been really since the late 80s. I think when John Nugugi won his four straight in a row, it sort of was a big wake up call to the rest of the world that the Kenyans were going to be real, for real and real. So yeah, the women's race was pretty impressive when your perfect score is extremely hard to do. I don't think it's ever been done at the world level. It's just mind boggling assortment of racing and just crazy to think about getting a perfect score.

Especially at that level.

A perfect score even at the high school level is almost undoable unless you're at a district meet or your own home meet or something like that. So to have it happen at the highest level where everyone's gunning for each other, it's just crazy. It's a crazy result.

So the US women I think had a solid result. They were fifth, first on a non-African team. And a couple of the US women are worth mentioning. You had Kenyan-born Alaphine Tullamoke who got 15th. She was the first US finisher. But then a couple that in this case I'd prefer to talk about Stephanie Bruce was our second American finishing in 22nd. She's a Wellzel runner, has run the marathon distance for quite some time now, has two kids, so she's a mom, and it's great to see her finish in the top 25 on this stage. And then Natasha Rogers finished 23rd right behind her teammate.

Shout out to the Aggies.

And yeah, Natasha Rogers is probably a little known name among most circles, but is definitely a name you should remember. She finished second in the trials in 2012. Didn't make the Olympic team because she didn't have the standard, but she won the NCAAs in the 10K. And then because of injuries and some other issues, kind of got away from running for a while, but is now back, and it's great to see her finish 23rd and stamp her mark as somebody to watch, you know, again.

When she moves to the marathon, it's over. She'll, like Emily Sisson, she's going to be, she's specifically cut. I watched, she's built to be a marathoner. I watched her throughout her years at Texas A&M. She ran right down the street while I was coaching at UT. And that girl has the most tenacious fight, and she's an absolute racer, and seeing her get back into a healthy position and competitive again, I think Americans should be paying close attention. The world should be paying close attention to Tasha Rogers. You're going to definitely be hearing from her soon.

So that's the women's side. On the men's side, you had an epic head-to-head battle between the home-born or host race country team, Josh Chepteige. He went out in what was only described by the guy who ended up winning at a suicidal pace, had the lead by 12 seconds going into the final 2K loop, but was ultimately passed by Jeffrey Kamrorer, who won last year and is the first to repeat for the World Cross title since Pichelli did it in 2006.

He was also really everyone's prohibitive favorite in the 10, 000 for the Olympic Games this past year in Rio, but he just came into it. We found out later he had some illness issues that had gotten to him in the weeks prior. He didn't adjust training appropriately and then came in super flat. He didn't even think he was top three at the Canyon Trials. I think they put him in the team because they wanted him to run well, but he just didn't get back. So great to see him running at a great level. I'll tell you what, if you get a chance to do a little... Chris can probably link the video, a YouTube video of the Ugandan gentleman's demise over the final 2K or so. I don't think I've ever seen a runner more in pain and suffering than I saw this guy and the crowd. Also, I don't think I've ever heard a world cross-country race be so loud. You can hear the Ugandans just yelling and screaming and cheering and doing the la-la-la-la-la-la. It was great. It was like super energy. And then, of course, when he's dying over the end, they're cheering for him to get to the finish, a super dramatic finish. I think he ended up 20th or something? 30th.

He dropped from first to 30th in the final 2K.

Yeah, so you can imagine it was tough, but if you want to watch a little running horror, watch it. But of course, you'll probably dream about it at some point in time. When you see that, you think, that's what my dream is in that last 100 meters when 18 people come by me in that recurring dream that I can never get out of my head, that I even have now, that I'm not racing hardly at all, and I still wake up in the middle of the night going, how many guys beat me in the last 100? I can't move. I'm moving through mud. And the guy looks like he's pogoing up and down, leaning backwards, and buckling, has legs buckling. And when you look at it, you're like, it was 75 degrees at the start. And they run 10K, and it was sunny and hot, you could tell. But man, super drama in the World Cross Country Championship. And again, I think the Canyon won again. The Ugandans had made a bold claim. Even the Americans made a bold claim.

Well, the Ethiopian men won the team competition. Kenya ended up second.

Oh, so I didn't, I guess I missed that part.

Kenya had the first two positions on the podium, and the Ethiopian finished third, but they got the team win. But Uganda did hold on for the bronze, and Josh Chagie ended up being, he finished 30th, but he was their last scorer, so every little bit of his result mattered to get them on the podium. Team USA was talking to Big Game. They went out hard, had two guys in the top six early in the race.

Had a leader for a while.

But fell to fifth, first African again, team. And so, Leonard Courier, who had talked to Big Game and said that the US could win the gold, he ended up dropping to 20th after being in the top six, but you got to give them credit for going for it.

Yeah, and to thinking that they could win it. I think that that's not something any American team has said in a long time. And we did have a better performance, was it two or three years ago, where we got third at the World Cross Country Championships? Completely different makeup of the team now. We've got, and some people call this a controversy. I'm not sure it's quite a controversy. We and Chris can save long discussion of this point to some other point, but I think most of the American team was all Kenyan, almost all but one or two of the members of our American team.

Four were Kenyan born.

Four were Kenyan born athletes. So that's a topic for another day. But, you know, I still, regardless of how I feel about that, I also think it's great to see the Stars and Stripes up top, up front, running and going for it.

And they were only six points off the podium. So if they had run a more conservative race, they could have potentially been on the podium, but career said, we're going for it. So they did. And you got to give them kudos for that. So congrats to Team USA, fifth in both team results there at World Cross. But hopefully we've given people just a tiny taste of that. But I'll link to that YouTube video because it is cool to watch. The Ugandans going crazy for their countrymen. So with that, we've already spent too much time talking about cross-country. Let's jump into our main topic.

Our guests are wondering what is going on.

Are we going to get to be on this or are you just going to take over the show? Typical men. So we'll jump into our main topic, which is women's running. And again, we've got Jen and Mallory joining us, both women runners and coaches that are going to help us talk through some of these things. And as I mentioned at the top, this is for men and women. Hopefully, we can demystify something for the men out there that might not understand the realities that women face and some of the challenges that they face with their training, but also hopefully help women who might be looking for some help on some of these topics. So with that, we're going to kind of split this into two chapters or discussions. One will be about women's health and related topics, and we'll talk about women's training and some nuances there that might relate to women. Jumping into women's health, and we're just going to start kind of and get the most uncomfortable topic out of the way, right out of the gate. And as we were prepping for this, I was uncomfortable, Jen was laughing at me awkwardly, but we're just going to jump in and we're going to talk about women, periods and running. Because, you know, bleeding like you guys do once a month has got to be really challenging when it comes to training. And I don't think men really understand that. So let's talk about it. I'm going to go to you, Jen. Here's the question. Is there a way to relate the experience you have going through your period while training to anything a man would understand? Is it even possible?

Well, maybe if you couldn't hold your bladder and you peed all over yourself all the time.

Just after midnight and eight or nine beers, but no other than that.

Yeah, I think that's what it... When I first started my period, I was 12, and they said, you'll know when you start when it feels like you peed your pants. And that's exactly...

So uncontrollably peeing yourself.

No, I mean, we have tampons, so it's not really... I've never found it to be a big ordeal, to be very honest, except I want to know when I'm going to have it in regards to major races.

And workouts, I assume. So let's talk about that. How do you deal with having your period monthly and trying to manage either a race or a hard workout around it? Because does it affect you?

I mean, aside from just it being uncomfortable, and now I have to worry about like, well, don't wear any light colored pants. And because not only is it now uncomfortable, but now everybody else knows I'm uncomfortable. But then there are also feelings of being like slightly weaker, right? The like iron depletion and the moodiness that can come with it.

I mean, cramps.

It's uncomfortable. I guess the best way I could describe it would be like having like a cramp in your leg, but in your lower abdomen. And you constantly feeling like you need to like hunch over. So it's hard to hold that tall, light and lean posture. Just general. Everything feels lower. You feel puffier. Your body is carrying more weight. Everything's puffier. So not only are you feeling down mentally, but now you're feeling like you're weighted down more because you are.

So when I used to coach girls cross country, and a girl would come up and she would say, Coach, I can't run practice today. I just started my period. I would say, well, actually, did you know that when you're on your period, you can run faster? And they were like, wait, really? That's true? Oh, absolutely. I mean, it's not true at all.

Your mind games.

It's not scientifically true.

No, it's not. But if you start to believe that, then I don't know. Maybe it is true. So I think deep down, I started telling athletes that, and I just started assuming that that was real for me, too. So I've never seen it as a big deal except for the shorts, like the color of shorts I'm going to wear, and making sure I have extra supplies. Of course, I did do a race one time, and I didn't, and then I had to quit the race. That was the only race I've ever quit.

See, in trail running, you can just jump into the closest water source.

So you're saying you wouldn't make any changes in your workouts because of it?

No, absolutely not.

And what about racing? Would you do anything differently?

Well, this year, I knew that when the Austin Marathon was approaching, that I was most likely going to be close to having my period. And I did increase my iron intake just in case.

In advance?

Yeah, I normally don't take iron supplements. I know I'm supposed to, but I forget a lot of times. And so I was mindful of actually taking my iron supplements just in case. So I wouldn't be low.

But other than that, you're approaching it mentally. Like, I can be stronger through this.

Yes, absolutely.

I feel like as soon as you open that door of using it as an excuse, then you've kind of opened yourself up to always being able to use it. Instead, just think about it as like... I'm not trying to hide it. I don't want to say that anybody should be ashamed of it. But as soon as I use it as an excuse, then I'm doing myself a disservice.

Right.

Okay, now are there any tips and tricks as it relates to managing some of the symptoms? Cramping, bloating, any of that? Or is that just figure it out? Everybody has their tips.

Everybody is so different. It's hard to know. I don't have all those side effects. I can only kind of tell you about ultra trail racing and how unfortunate that is because then you have to bring everything with you and you can dig a hole and poop in the woods. You can't dig a hole and throw a tampon or pad in the woods. So now there's this whole fun part of carrying as a black bag and pack in, pack out. And this pack I paid extra for to be two ounces lighter is now quarter pounder, quarter pound heavier.

These are things men don't have to think about.

Yeah.

Okay, as an attorney to you, Steve, you coached UT Women's Distance Team, Cross Country and 5K, 10K on the track for seven years. As a man coaching women through these things, how did you approach it with them?

I had two basic approaches. Number one was to make sure that every athlete could talk to me and discuss it with me if they wanted to. They really didn't want to. My role there was kind of a benevolent uncle in terms of, not a dad, but a dad figure who was cool and got along with them and didn't tell them what to do every minute of the day. So they didn't really want to talk to me about it too much, but they all knew right off the bat they could and that there was not necessarily an excuse built in, but an understanding that adjustments would need to be made. Once I did that, it was pretty amazing how I never heard about it ever again. Ever. Nobody ever talked to me about it. Sometimes I would get a post-race excuse, and what I would do is just say, okay, that's a good reason and move on, because it wasn't anything we could do anything about, as both Mallory and Jen are telling us. It is what it is. You don't want to make it any worse than it actually is. One thing that was really intriguing to me, and you know, I'm not going to try to, I don't want to get it because I'm a man, but it was crazy. All the girls that lived in the dorm together, all of them started to, they would have their periods at the exact same time. It was awesome for me. Once I got that figured out what their cycles were, I quit doing 21-day cycles, and I started doing cycles on 28 days generally, because it made a big difference, and then I could actually kind of line up where their races were and how their races were. I didn't get it right all the time, but I almost never had a serious episode right before a national championship or a regional championship, and so it provided me with an opportunity to do that. It didn't work so well when they lived off campus, even though many of them lived together, I couldn't coordinate, so there would be, one house would have theirs a week and a half or two weeks later, and they wouldn't really tell me, but you can tell the way that they respond to you as a coach on the track when they're just more irritable and more grumpy, and it's like a headache, right? It's like someone who has a migraine. Do you know that they're working through it, and the best thing to do is to not give them an excuse, but to also understand if there is one to be cognizant of it. So that's sort of the way that I approached it and looked at it. And honestly, you know, I also live and have run with a woman, and I wrote Ruth England now for 15 years plus, and I don't think she's ever complained one time ever. So I also had that sort of, before I coached at UT, I had that experience of living with her and realizing she not only has really painful time, but she also has really bad migraines, and they get triggered by all the hormonal stuff. And so she is debilitated, but does not act in any way, shape, or form as if she is. She is a fucking rock star at the end of the day, period, end of story. And so I already knew that this is the best way to roll. So I had a great leader in that role of saying, don't make it be a thing unless they make it be a thing. And if it is a thing, then you deal, right?

Well, and for the guys listening who train with women, I've trained with women for a long time, and never once have I heard a single one of them complain about it or use it as an excuse, and yet it's happening every month, so obviously they've had races and workouts where we've been together where it's happening, but I've never heard about it. And you have guys that are begging off and using much, you know, lamer excuses for not having results. It's like, come on, guys, women are going through this once a month. You don't hear, you never hear a peep. And it's physiological stuff that would probably make most of us cry if it happened once.

That's why women are the tougher sex. There's no doubt about it. Anybody who thinks differently needs to get checked.

So let's talk about the associated iron deficiencies and anemia that might come with it, especially if women aren't thinking about their iron levels and things like that. So, and I'll take this to you, Jen, because you've coached a lot of women through these kinds of things. What do you recommend as it relates to iron?

Well, I think first, most women should go get their iron checked on a regular basis with your doctor just to make sure that you're not anemic or that you're borderline. And then if you are somewhat borderline or getting close, that you should definitely take an iron supplement. I've always used a liquid iron because it goes into your body faster. And I usually do one that's twice a day, so in the morning and then again in the evening. But you also have to, sometimes iron can make you constipated. And you have to also make sure that you're taking iron with vitamin C. And I learned this in college, don't take iron with like soda or like coffee. Yeah, exactly. So just knowing the right way to take iron so that it absorbs properly. And then getting your iron checked, I think is really important. Not just for women though. I mean, men also have sometimes iron deficiencies anytime they're doing long distance training.

And as a coach, I coach a lot of women. And so sometimes when they come to me and they say I've been fatigued, and usually I go through sort of a list of are you getting enough sleep? Are you running too fast in your workouts? Have you done more than I prescribed? And if all those things are okay, then potentially could be a blood, you know, blood issue. And I tell them, go get your levels checked across, you know, not just iron, but other things as well. What about for you, Mallory, have you ever had issues with iron deficiency?

No, I feel like everybody's going to hate me right now because I don't have cramps.

I'm a perfect little man.

I don't get moody. My husband. So I'm really pretty much a knot an expert on talking about this.

If you don't fit your pants, you really suck.

Yeah.

That's later. But I try to make sure I get all the iron and like leafy greens and diet. We don't take supplements in our house, but unless there's a point in time that it's necessary, but I try to get away from regularly taking them. I don't necessarily need them like iron it.

What's your leafy green of choice?

Chard, kale.

Chard. How do you cook it?

Scramble it in eggs.

Really?

Yeah.

Interesting.

Johnson's Backyard Garden will deliver it.

I hear you have a healthy compost pile.

Unfortunately. It doesn't always all get eaten.

Well, because Paxson won't eat it, right?

Because Paxson won't eat it.

That's her son, by the way.

I have this woman from Prep To Your Door coming over to our house, Heather, and she's going to come show me how to cook all of it. Because I basically only have one way that I know how to cook it, and my husband may be tired of eating eggs and chard.

Eggs and chard.

You know, Chris, one thing that my experience of having coached many people who have anemia or get anemic in the middle of a training cycle. I had one of my very best athletes in terms of race performances over the years at UT. She got anemic right after the NCAA Championships and right before we went into some key races where we were trying to get her qualified. And you know, it takes at minimum two weeks to start to feel a bit better, and then it takes another two weeks before you start to see sort of the results of your iron intake, and then it takes about another two weeks to be really kind of in a spot where you're ready to go. And during that time, I think what many people do is they back off more than they should, and in a way that one of the doctors that was seeing this athlete at UT told me, consider it altitude training. So basically consider the fact that you're in a position where you're not getting enough iron, so you're not getting the oxygen to your working muscles in the way that you need to. And while you shouldn't go to the well, just like you wouldn't in altitude, when you train at altitude, you shouldn't be hammering and hammering and hammering at high altitude, but you should be still doing work. You just back the level off a little bit, but you continue to do the work. Maybe don't worry so much about the paces that you're trying to hit, and really focus on continuing to stay with it to the best of your ability, and know that's the reason why you're tired. It's not stress. It's not lack of sleep. It's not all these other things that could possibly be. You now know. Check. I know exactly what it is. I'm taking care of it, and I'll get to where I need to get. For most marathoners, as long as this doesn't happen right at the end of the race cycle, they're going to be all right, and they can actually kind of flip the script a little bit and turn it into a training effect and a positive thing. Those folks who do get in that state of being anemic, we haven't talked about this yet in this podcast, but many people get anemic, and it doesn't have to be the end of the world. Most doctors are going to prescribe, and I am not a doctor, so please take that as a caveat, but they're going to be way conservative, way more conservative than my experience would tell a person to be.

And it's important to know that men could have this issue, too. So if you're feeling additional fatigue for any reason, definitely get your blood checked. For me, I had a vitamin D deficiency going into Boston last year, which partially contributed to my stress fracture during the race. But it reminded me that I need to regularly get my blood values checked when I'm in heavy training. So not only do I then have my thresholds for what's sort of normal for me, but also I'm able to check and see if there's variation that might be causing issues.

What did you do to counter that deficiency?

I started supplementing. So now I take liquid drops every day.

Unlike me, who basically takes his shirt off and runs through the woods in the sun. But you know, we're all different. His wife will kill me for that.

My wife will not allow that. So that's sort of blood level. Now let's talk about birth control. Because obviously this is in some way related, and women that are on birth control can kind of normalize their cycle perhaps by using that as a tool. But talk about birth control and running. Is there anything that women should be thinking about there?

Jump in, Jen. You got this. Okay. Well, I think, I mean, I've been on different types of birth control. I've been on the pill and I've been on a depot shot, which I didn't react very well to. I gained about 10 pounds pretty quickly. And so I think just knowing that even if you get on birth control, you might need to kind of play with different ones to see which one reacts best to your body. I personally don't like birth control. I stopped taking it many years ago. And just because when I'm not on birth control, I'm pretty regular every 28 days. And I don't like putting something in my body that my body can regulate on its own. And I think that birth control doesn't always have to be put on a woman. Yeah, sorry. I wish they would have that pill for men. Men, bring your condoms. Yes. But I have had athletes that have gotten on birth control and experienced bad side effects. And so we get through that either by changing up their training for a brief period of time or maybe trying something else that will work for them. But you can, when I was on the pill and I was in college, I would regulate when I would have my period based on certain, like if I had conference coming up and I didn't want to have my period, I would just continue on birth control and then I would take the placebo pills. I don't know if you're technically supposed to do that. I'm not a doctor.

Women consult your doctor. Right.

But that's what I would do.

And if you're going to change, if you're on birth control and you're going to change, don't change in the six to eight weeks prior to a race.

Right.

That's probably the most important thing you could tell someone is they'll find what works for them and what doesn't work for them in the natural normal process of living life. But it's really crucial and critical not to make that change because so many variables need to be limited in terms of making the right decisions right before a race and not knowing and creating another factor, another variable that could be a problem for you without knowing it is problematic. So yeah, it might seem logical, but many people don't consider that as having an effect on what they're doing race-wise.

Absolutely.

And Mallory, you're the lucky one that is not on it and not affected by it.

Well, I wasn't having a great experience with birth control pills and didn't like the idea of putting that in my body, but apparently I was okay with putting a tiny piece of plastic in my body. So I have an IUD that is going to last for five years, I think four years into it. We had one kid and the wild child has filled the void of having ten children, I think. So that's kind of worked really, really well for me. I don't know if that works well for everybody else, but it's basically just I probably have like two periods a year now.

Oh my God.

I told you. You don't want to hear my input.

Well, some people might want to get on our IUD now. So maybe that input is important. But I think the points are one, that it's individual and you got to figure out what works for you. But two, also if you're going to make a change to what you're using for birth control, then plan for that in the context of your training. So you're not making a change in the midst of a really important training period. And yes, men.

Period.

Period. Yes, men, right. That was no pun intended until you guys did that. And yes, men, take your own responsibility in the context of birth control and, you know, buy and bring your own condoms so women don't have to worry about it themselves. Now, let's get to another uncomfortable topic, infections. We were doing our prep for this and creating an outline. You told me some great stories about bladder infections and yeast infections. These are infections that don't typically kind of, we have to, that men don't typically have to deal with. So you had a great tip on bladder infections and how to avoid those, because there's nothing like an infection to get in the way of your training. So what's your big tip on bladder infections?

My big tip on bladder infections is to pee after you have sex. That way you don't get an infection, because that's how most of them start is you don't pee afterwards. You got to pee. That's what my doctor told me.

Man, you have sickness in you, and you make women and you're infecting women.

No, my doctor told me, he was like, you know, it's like there's all these fluids, and they're all involved, and sometimes those fluids get...

You just got to get them out of there.

Yeah, so you got to pee.

Or shower, is it showering?

No, you have to pee.

Unless you pee in the shower.

You just got to pee in the shower.

Pee in the shower.

Pee after sex.

Now we know you guys do that, so just, you know.

No one... No.

Okay, so go pee, and then obviously if you get a bladder infection, go to the doctor.

Absolutely.

Get on medicine. What about yeast infections? Have either of you ever dealt with one of those?

Yeah, so I did in college. I'm not gonna lie.

Mallory's not a liar, actually.

Mallory has a smooth sailing over there. So you had it in college.

Yes, I had my first yeast infection in college, and I went to the drug store and bought something over the counter, and it didn't react very well for me personally. And so then I had to go to what we called the Quack Shack and get, oh, I forgot the name of the prescription drug, but that worked really well. And luckily, I don't get yeast infections, which is weird because I don't even eat yogurt. And they say to eat yogurt if you have a yeast, if you're like prone to yeast infections. But I don't get them very often. But you should always shower after you run. You should. I know that sounds weird, but I know men and women that don't shower for a couple of days after they're running. They should shower.

Are they in relationships?

Maybe not.

But you also mentioned too that it was really important to make sure if you have a situation like that, you go see your doctor.

Absolutely.

Get medical advice quickly and get on and off the drugs that you need to get that fixed and get back to being normal and running and training normally.

For some women, they get yeast infections when they're on an antibiotic for maybe a different infection. Because those antibiotics really mess with your bacteria levels and basically your yeast. And so, if you are on an antibiotic and then you get a yeast infection, I would recommend just going straight to the doctor as opposed to using over-the-counter medication.

Consult your doctor. Okay, now let's switch gears a little bit from infections to pregnancy.

I've been pregnant.

We've got two experienced mothers here. Mallory has one, Jen has two boys. All boys.

All boys.

Yep.

And so, talk about training through pregnancy. My wife ran all the way through her pregnancy, I think, till a week before all of them were born. And, you know, but tell us about your experiences.

I'm the opposite of your badass wife. I decided that it was just like an, talk about not using it as an excuse. I just wanted to not run. Just like see what it was like to not run for seven, eight months. So I probably ran one or two months into my pregnancy and then just stopped. And I paddle boarded and I did pilates and I did all this other. It made me kind of go explore other things, but not because it was uncomfortable, but just because I kind of felt like it was a good excuse to go explore other things. So I stopped running. But you were still active, but still very active and it worked out the day that he was born. And and just like with everything else, never used being pregnant as an excuse for eating poorly or basically just tried to kind of forget I was pregnant and do what I would normally do. I don't have the luxury of not being active and exercising because I have to coach and I have to teach classes. So I was still working out once or twice a day. Just not running.

Right.

You for you, Jen.

So I was also coaching, but I was not doing the same kind of coaching. I was coaching high school kids and I was still coaching. I remember coaching and doing leg swings and teaching drills and doing all of that the day before I went into labor with miles. I didn't necessarily run every single day. I did run, but I just shortened up how much like I didn't run as far. I was only running about three or four miles a day. And sometimes I would walk if it was hot or if I didn't feel great. But I also didn't change my diet. I didn't use it as an excuse to eat a lot of food. I would get full really quickly. And I probably became more obsessive about what I was putting into my body because I knew it was for someone else. And so I like didn't drink coffee and didn't, of course, do alcohol, even though I know now you apparently can, but I didn't. And I like ate more walnuts because they said that that helps like the baby's brain. So I just went totally overboard with food.

But you were also active.

I was very active. Yeah.

And again, we've got Dr. Gucci trains with us and TeamRogue has taken or at least help. He's an OBGN. He's taken a lot of our TeamRogue women through the process. And he always says a healthy mom is a healthy baby. So it's important to stay active.

Yeah, I think it's also your doctor.

And if you have issues, obviously consult your doctor and work through them with him or her. But staying active is an important part of being healthy as a mother and having a healthy child.

I think you should also listen to your body and be mindful of it's changing. And you're not supposed to lift as much. That was one lesson that I learned when I was pregnant with Mason, my second child. And I was at a track meet. And I was swinging my oldest, who was about two years old, and I was swinging him around and didn't think anything of it, didn't think about his weight. And then the next morning when I woke up, I couldn't lift, I couldn't actually straighten myself up. I had strained the ligaments down below because I was eight months pregnant swinging a toddler. So I think you do have to be mindful. You have to remember, hey, I am pregnant and I can't do everything I was doing before. So, you know, just be mindful of that.

So I have an experience with an athlete recently who I coached who is the complete antithesis of Mallory from the way that she approached it. I think she ran, I know for a fact, two marathons, if not three in the context of her pregnancy, one of which was Boston at a point where I still am in shock that she was able to complete the distance and to do what she did. But I think that that's kind of the point that, again, while we're talking about women's issues, the resounding theme that we're talking about here is just take it individually, look at what's right and appropriate for you as we do it all things, and then consult proper medical personnel, and then make sure you've got a plan that matches the kind of lifestyle and the kind of focus that you want. And it can be from the extreme of not running but once or twice in an entire eight-month cycle to running a marathon a month or a month and a half before you actually deliver. So there's a lot of different options for a lot of different people, but again, I think Mallory's point is the same, reiterating the same point we made many times, which is no excuses, continuing to function to the best of your ability as a human being and going from there.

I mean, everybody's case is so different. So as long as you're just listening to your body and doing what you should do, I mean, everybody's period is different from person to person. Everybody's pregnancy is different from person to person. The worst thing I feel like you can do is put your rules or your experience on somebody and make them feel like that's what they should expect. The worst thing that happened to me before my pregnancy or during was that people were like, well, you should be running. You know you can run. I'm like, I don't want to run back off. You know, people are like, well, don't get a C-section. Well, C-section is the only way to go. Just like, hey, just back off. We should all be way more supportive and less judgmental about each other.

Well, and everybody has their labor horror stories that they want to project on you as well. So talk about, well, at least post pregnancy getting back. So I'm going to ask you, did you deliver vaginally or VSC section?

A natural vaginal birth.

And Jen?

Vaginally.

Same. So getting back to activity after that, because that's tough. I mean, there's stitches involved sometimes. And I don't think men really realize the damage that vaginal delivery can do. And then it takes time to kind of get things back together. And sometimes you're different forever more. So talk about that. And for you, how did it work resuming activity?

I mean, aside from just the stitches, you know, will go away. That's very superficial. It's painful and it is uncomfortable, but you know that it's going to heal. For me, the harder part was like that my pelvis shifted, that there was pain in my pubic bone that wouldn't go away when I was running, that I didn't feel like like I felt like my core wasn't holding my organs in anymore. That's a gross way to think about it. But it was like things were just like looser. I'd like built a home in my stomach for something. And it's not that easy for your body to just go right back. As active as I'd been and as healthy as I'd been eating. And it's I still went to a bunch of PT and tried to get this pubic bone thing taken care of. Because basically my pelvis had moved around a little bit and it was hard to get it to settle back in. And there are still things that I deal with all the time. There's still some pain there. There's still like peeing on myself when I run. Just that's become a norm.

It sucks.

And that's just their muscles that have been loosened and will never do their job the same again.

They'll do their job.

Well, I mean.

Don't dog on those muscles.

They're good muscles.

They're good muscles. But you have things that are permanently different for you.

Yes, yeah, you do.

And what about for you, Jen, getting back to running? How long did it take?

After the first one, probably longer. And then after Mason, the second one, I went back to work after three weeks because cross-country season had started. And I just started running with the team, even though I wasn't really. I think my doctor didn't release me until six weeks, but I started after three weeks and it was fine.

It's about where I was.

It was okay. I mean, it sucks. You feel like flabby and you just don't feel like yourself. But eventually everything gets back to normal. It takes several years, but it does get back to normal.

Except for the peeing on yourself.

That never goes away. That just sucks.

So what do you do? Does it matter? Do you just let it happen? I mean, hydrate effectively.

Almost dehydrate.

If you dehydrate, everyone will know. If you hydrate effectively, people really won't know.

It just makes running in the rain.

Ultimately, it's just a little water and nitrogen, right? I mean, who cares?

Yeah, exactly. You can drink it if absolutely necessary. It's not that gross.

It's not a big deal. So you're saying you don't make a big deal out of it.

Well, I don't really make a big deal about it, but I'll tell you, I run with guys and I have to pee a lot. Like I have to like, hey, I'm going to stop after two seconds and I have to pee. And it's only like the first mile or so. And then or it's pee on myself. It's one or the other.

That's an unfair dilemma. It's like, OK, we did the Canadian death race and one mile in because they only have like five porta potties for these 2000 runners, whatever. And at mile one, all the guys are pulling off to the side and peeing. It's like, wait a second. Where's my spot? I don't really want to moon everybody. So what my options are to hike in to the woods, pee and come back, to expose myself and be on the side of the trail or to pee on myself.

Which did you choose? All things men don't have to think about.

No.

There is a double standard there, by the way. I mean, women should be able to just squat and do it anywhere, too, like men peeing against the wall or against a tree somewhere.

I'll never forget standing on a starting line with Ruth at one point in time, and I dip down to one knee and pull it out and pee on the side, and she dips down to one knee and pulls her shorts over and does the same thing. Mine makes a little less splashing and a little less problem for me. Hers wasn't able to be quite controlled, but she was like, it's a lot better than peeing on my side. I was like, literally no problem. I'm just moving on. Just get used to it. I mean, she told me she'd done it at multiple marathons in Ironmans where at the starting line when you're in Ironmans, it doesn't matter. You're in the water, right? So it doesn't really matter. But yeah, it was an eye-opener for me. It's like, no, this is... Men don't get it, but there are women who basically, they just make it work. So, you know...

And let them make it work, guys.

Yeah, don't look over and go, oh, whatever, you know.

Don't judge or think it's weird. You're peaking against things all the time that are ridiculous.

I mean, unless you're into that thing.

We won't be talking about golden showers on the podcast, Steve. You've already dropped the first F-bomb of Running Rogue history. You knew it was coming.

You knew it was coming.

Honestly, I'm surprised it took this long. Okay, so let's switch gears and talk about training. We've already talked about it a little bit, in our midst with some of the health-related topics. Let's talk about training, and we've talked about nutrition a little bit already, but nutrition and body image and fueling are a big part of some of the things that women do maybe in a different context than men. So talk about that. Have either of you ever personally dealt with, you know, body image issues or eating disorder types of things or, you know, temptations on that dimension?

I mean, I think we'd be lying if we said no, because, of course, we're human one. We're women second, right? So, okay. Yeah, of course. And there are intimidating groups of people to run with. And I went from running with the trail group that runs in shirts to running with TeamRogue that runs shirtless, and I describe myself as like the person wearing a shirt, just because I don't want to have to think about what maybe it looks like from behind. But that's ridiculous. I mean, you know, I'm working with one of Steve's athletes, and I like that she was like, look, I don't care what I look like, I just want to be fast. And if we could all get to that place, and maybe it comes and goes, we're human, but if we can all get to this place where like healthy is sexy and that nobody, you know, I once saw this scale of like, you know, imagine an image of ten women drawn out, right? One is super skinny and one in ten is obese. And women were asked, which one do you think is the most attractive? And they would circle like number two or three. And men would circle like four or five. So for, you know, not ultimately our goal in life is not to please men, but you know, that's, look at what they think sexy is, and healthy is sexy, and if we can get to a place where just fast is hot, don't worry about, you know, we, I feel like women need to be careful about, again, like how judgy we are. And if, right, like across the board, we worry more about cellulite than guys do because you don't necessarily have it. And you guys worry more about balding because it's what you guys worry about versus cellulite. So if we can all be way more supportive of each other, then I think we'd help each other out. But also realize that we all have cracks, and there are days where I'm like, well, just like don't look in the mirror. It's not good for you. Just like go remember how fast you are and how good you feel.

Yes. So I have probably a different experience just because I grew up in the 90s running competitively and early 90s. And I had a high school coach that told me to lose weight every year. And my entire team had an eating disorder. One girl had to drop out of college because she was so bulimic. It was really sad. And then I got to college and I was told to lose 10 pounds immediately. And both were female coaches. And so in college, it was the same thing. There were girls living off slim fast and taking ripped fuel and passing out of practice. And it was, that was what I grew up with. And so I never had an eating disorder, but only because I don't like throwing up and I really like food. Or maybe it was because I don't have, I tend to be more even keel and not, I know Steve probably wouldn't agree with that, but I tend to be more balanced. And I don't know why I didn't end up with one, but I didn't. But I sure as hell had body image issues for a really long time. I thought I was fat and I wasn't. I was beautiful and healthy and sexy and much thinner than I am now. And I thought I was fat for a really long time. And it took having kids and realizing that how I view myself is how they're also going to view themselves and how important it was to change the way I view myself and to learn how to just be thankful and of what my body is capable of doing and to love my body.

As a coach who works with a lot of women, how do you talk to someone who's struggling with this?

So I have a good family friend who's a therapist and she works with women who have eating disorders and she works with men who have eating disorders and have body image issues. And the message that she gave me, I just continue to preach and it's to be thankful of what your body can do and focus on being strong and being healthy, like Mallory said. And to be appreciative of your body and to not tear yourself down. And that starts with just how you verbally talk about yourself. So you need to, like, I personally have had to change the way I talk about myself and talk about myself in a positive way and say nice things about myself and to myself as opposed to negative things. Because it's really easy to do. It's really easy to say, oh, I'm slow, oh, I'm fat. And have this weird competition that a lot of women have with each other of like, oh, I hate myself more than you hate yourself. And so just trying to be aware of that and change that.

Steve, you coached college women.

Oh, I have extensive experience in this area, not personally. Although I will tell you, I do have experience with it personally because I had a coach that weighed me in college. And men, if you are still listening to us, I know some of you guys are borderline eating disordered. And this is a question not of eating, disordered eating is, I learned this in my experience at UT because we had some of the most amazing doctors and therapists available to us because Texas, as you know, Jen, Texas had for many years a huge problem. Absolutely. One of Jen's coaches was an athlete who ran at the University of Texas who had major issues in this regard. And Texas had a crazy epidemic on its hands in the 90s when I went there. But we had it on the men's side as well as the women's side. But the point I'm trying to make is that disordered eating is really a psychological issue. It's not a physical issue. It gets treated initially kind of as a physical issue because frequently when people get to the point where they're really obvious that they're disordered, there's a real problem. I mean, their bodies are breaking down, they can't hold themselves up, they have bone stress issues to a point that they're really medically in a really bad spot. But it's a psychological issue. It's a control issue. And I had a great mentor to help teach me how to balance that. I had two or three really traumatic cases, and I also had three or four cases at UT where people walked away in an incredible position where they had their best races later in their life. So my approach was I was also not allowed at the University of Texas to talk about nutrition. That was the proof because of the challenges that happened in the mid 90s at UT. I was required to only discuss to not discuss nutrition in any way, shape or form. It's really ham, which really hamstrings a coach because it's such a crucial piece of what you talk about, especially at that age. But so I did what I only could do, which was to talk to people about their lives and then to take the advice that they said that this is a control issue. And they couldn't stop me from talking about control stuff. So I would just work with, what were they controlling that day academically? What were they controlling that day in their athletic world? What were they controlling that day with a major relationship they had, whether with a girlfriend or a boyfriend? And then they would open up to me to the point where we could simply, I could just repeat this mantra, which I use all the time. And it's a TeamRogue mantra. And it comes from my experience at UT from Just Ordered Eating. It's called healthy, happy, strong. People who coach work with me, they'll hear me talk about it all the time. If you're healthy, if you're happy, and if you're strong, on all three of those fronts, you're rocking down the road. If any one of those is out of kilter or out of whack, then you have a real problem. And especially when it comes to Just Ordered Eating, they can say no, no, and no, right? In those three questions. So then you can kind of say, okay, if it's healthy, no. Well, obviously the doctors are involved. We're in a dead bad spot. If it's happy is involved, well, then there's an issue about control and how you control yourself and what's going on with control and what pieces you can start to add control to, like tell your boyfriend no, or do this instead of that, or study at, wake up at, I would, there was one girl who I told her, she wanted, she thought she was supposed to wake up at 6, and I would say wake up at 6.30. And then the next two weeks or three weeks later, she would come and I'd say wake up at 5.30. She's like, you're telling me different things. I'm saying, no, you're in control. Tell your body you're in control. So she got to control little tiny things, and we just worked on little tiny patterning processes to try to get her to the point where she got it. This girl started her career, was the best freshman, best freshman performance at the NCAA Championships in cross country, which means her first year as a freshman coming out of a serious, disordered eating episode of her life, like multi-year thing. Did not take, took her until her senior year in college to get back into a position, and she was a scorer at the Big 12 Championship in track and field, which is even harder. So this person had a full circle event based on that experience, and at the end of it, she said to me, Healthy, Happy, Strong. Gave me a big hug and said Healthy, Happy, Strong. So I know for a fact that those words matter and that it is really a lot what Jen said. You know, I've made this a couple of times about this Saturday Night Live skit with Stuart Smalley where I love myself, I love myself. But you know what? Fake it till you make it. Start where you got to start, and get to the place where Healthy, Happy, Strong is something you're thinking about consciously, and you'll move down the road to a place of being healthy. And I think, as Mallory said at the beginning, we're all a bit disordered. Every distance runner out there is disordered because our sport is based upon being as lean as possible to get the fastest time we can. And we're all dealing with it, whether we're in an obese situation or we're actually in a disordered eating situation. So finding that balance and getting yourself right. Get medical attention, though, and then get psychological help. Like, I did the best I could, but both those athletes were also seeing a psychologist because that was a requirement for their process. So I won't say that the psychologist was always the most effective tool because I feel like a lot of times people need a real person in their life, but it's important to get help, and that's the most important thing.

It's also important to remember the dialogue around this, because for men I think it's different because the standard is different. I hear people tell me that I'm too skinny more often than anything else. And that's sort of a silly thing, right? It's like, oh, I'm too skinny. What do you mean, I'm too skinny? I'm a distance runner. That's what I'm supposed to be. But I hear that for me more than anything, but the pressure for women is the other way. It's that you're not skinny enough.

Would they say the same thing to you if they thought you were too fat?

No, no. I think the standard is different. Society looks at men and wherever they are from a weight perspective, and oftentimes pushes a skinny distance-runner guy to add weight to fit in and to be normal. Women, whether it's explicit and direct or implicit and implied by all the pressures that we get from pictures and media and magazines covers that you're never skinny enough. So I think that's why a lot of women deal with it or at least have pressures differently than men. But the men that are listening, you need to understand that words are important and how they talk about this is really important. And just to be hyper aware that it's about healthy, happy, strong and not about anything else. The other thing is that it's not about the eating most of the time. Like you said, it's about control and power. And I think a lot of people when they find someone, maybe they have someone closer to them that they find out has an eating disorder or suspect might have an eating disorder, they think it's about the food and so they just tell them to eat more. And as someone, you know, I had a bulimic girlfriend in college and I was the only one who knew about it at the time when she started having trouble. And so I had to get educated on it fairly quickly and my initial reactions were always wrong. It's like I just need to get her to eat and not throw it up. But it really wasn't about that. It was about control and power and some things in her past that had caused issues with control and power. And so anyway, understand when you're dealing with someone that it's not about that and that you need to get help and seek professional attention because no individual is going to be able to help someone through that, especially if they're at the stage of being unhealthy.

I will say that the most disordered eating athlete I've ever had was a male though. So men don't think it's just that.

Absolutely. So switching gears a little bit.

Positive.

To a more positive. Let's talk about strength since we've talked about healthy, strong. Let's talk about strength. Women's bodies are shaped a little bit differently. We talked about post pregnancy, what can happen. So is there anything from a strength training perspective that women should be thinking about in the context of their running or training that is different or that they need to be doing more of or that they need to be worried about? Mallory, I'll turn that to you since you're our resident strength expert.

I don't coach my women runners any differently than I coach my men runners. For the most part, they all need stronger hips and glutes and core. And just because maybe, I mean, I think, you know, your mind goes to thinking like, oh, well, women need to work more on their hips. I don't, I feel like that's always kind of a, I don't know, because women have like bigger hips, we think we need to work them out more. But for the most part, I can't think of how I treat either one differently. Always working on like power and connecting the mind with what they're doing. And I've worked with Terranova a little bit on this. And it's been fun to kind of, I trained him for a series of these Friday workouts where I tried to like make his brain focus on what muscles are firing and try to switch that around without switching the movement around. And now with one of Steve's athletes, I'm going to start doing that too. And she's female. So kind of see how that works with both genders. We've had success with, I've had success with a male client. We'll see with her as well. It's all so individual though. I mean, it's like this massive spectrum. I don't really have ever taken gender into consideration so much.

That's good to know, I think, and informative. Just don't worry about it. You be you. Work on your weaknesses. Okay. Jen, anything there from a coaching perspective that you would?

I just have more women that complain about the hips more. I know. I know you're looking at me. They just tend to, maybe because the men don't complain. I don't know. They just have usually their hips, their glutes are weaker.

Potentially.

Potentially. Maybe it's just the women. Maybe I have more women than I could. I don't know. I did have a guy today, though, tell me that his chronic injury is weak, weak hips and glutes.

The moral of the story is if you're a distance runner, work on hip, glute strength and your core, regardless of whether you're male or female, right? I mean, that's basically what we're saying.

I do have women, though, that come to me and say, like, I want to work out with you and put on muscle, but, like, I don't want to bulk up, as if they, like, could accidentally fall asleep and wake up with massive biceps, as if the women who are bodybuilders just, it just happened to them. Those women try really, really hard to gain that muscle mass. You will not gain that muscle mass on accident.

I think that's super important, what you just said, because I have heard...

You're lean, but not bulky. What does that mean?

I don't want to look like a man. I just want to be...

So let's just not do shrugs, is basically what they're saying. I mean, it's like, OK, I won't give you a massive neck.

But the protocols that you put into place in terms of the strength training that you do, Mallory, and that you guys do at Rail, it's all designed to functionally produce the best athlete possible. And we've all seen a bodybuilder run, and it is not a good look, right? So there's nothing good about that. And it's just a false dichotomy. They just don't get it right. And if they just did some work, they would begin to realize really quickly. I'm sure what you just do is say, OK, yeah, you won't, and then move on. Trust me.

And people throw around the term functional so much. And it's funny, because what does it mean? Because if a guy is doing seated bicep curls, is that functional training? Well, if he's trying to curl more, it's absolutely functional training. So it's just serving a function.

If he's doing 12-ounce curls, it might matter.

Whatever you want to accomplish, right? So for the most part, just think about what you want to generally accomplish before you go into any kind of weight training and then tell your coach that or research it under that umbrella of like, what can I do? Are you ultimately trying to stay injury free? Are you trying to have more power? Are you trying to do both? Are you trying to just get faster? Are you trying to put on more muscle mass? Because those are all different, they're all different ways to train, to accomplish each of those.

Plus, you come in with your own individual weaknesses and strengths, so you got to tailor those to your goals.

Everybody is asymmetrical, and now we have to take that into consideration.

Okay, switching gears slightly. So we wanted to make a PSA to all the men that are still listening, hopefully you are, that when you're training or running with women, don't be offended if somebody blows by you and passes you, especially men in Austin on the trail, because there's a lot of badass women. I train with them, and it is not the least a shot on my ego if one of them kicks my ass in a workout. But yet, for so many men, that's a struggle, and I think sometimes women kind of goad that on because they end up racing men because they know that it's getting to them. So let's talk about this. Jen, you were talking about it in the context of your training and racing. We talked about it on the trail. What do you have to say?

I would say just focus on you. And men, you too, just focus on you. But no, I think that what I said before we did the podcast was that I feel like women are ultimately sometimes more competitive than men, even though we do it in a silent sort of way. And we compete with each other, and it's not healthy sometimes, and we also tend to compete with men. There's been times when I was pushing my kids in a baby jogger on the trail, and there was a little like ego boost to pass a man, which is totally ridiculous, but I did it.

But it's real.

It is real. And you left the guy in the wake.

It happened. No, I would say a more healthy version would be to just focus on you and what you're doing to improve yourself. It is a real thing.

Don't race in training just because.

Do you think it's derogatory if somebody says that, if you beat them, to say that they got checked?

I don't think it's derogatory, but it's a little annoying. Yeah, it's annoying.

It's sexist.

It's derogatory. It's misogynistic, for sure.

But I have used that term frequently in my group because I think I'm so proud of the way that the women in my group run. And so I use it as a way of empowerment, which is a twisted misogynistic way, right? It's sort of a, I'm not sure if I should do it, but I also know it really, really works.

Jason's had a girl in front of him, and I'm like, dude, you're going to get checked if you don't pick it up.

Right, so you know.

It just depends on how you use it.

Correct. But it is also, but it is basically probably not the most appropriate thing. I want to give you guys an example of when I first started coaching at the University of Texas, I had a phenomenally talented athlete in my very first year. Well, many phenomenally talented athletes, but one of them is a particularly competitive individual, and she would get on the Town Lake Hike and Bike Trail and run. She had a class that sometimes would not allow her to run at the same time the rest of the team did. So she would get on the trail kind of on her own, and this athlete was super competitive. I mean, probably the most competitive person I've ever been around in my whole life.

Yeah.

And she absolutely could not. She couldn't back down. And so she would get on the trail. I would always send them to Town Lake Trail because I thought at the time that they'd be running relaxed and easy on a soft surface, beautiful afternoons. It would be awesome. She basically was racing almost every single day when she got on the trail because one guy would try to hold her off, and then she would race him. She was a 16-minute, 15-50, 5K runner at the time, and believe me, there are not too many of those guys out on the trail. But as soon as she passed the next one and went up to the next 18-minute douchebag guy, she would drop him too, but he would go with her for 400 or 600 or 800 meters, and it would happen over and over and over again. Finally, I banned her. I was like, you're off the trail. I don't know what's going on. We would go back to the trail and do a four-mile tempo run, and she couldn't run six-minute pace. I'm like, there's no reason why you can't run six-minute mile pace for four miles when I know what you're capable of running, realizing later that if I had had a Strava or had a heart rate monitor or some other way to track what her training really was, I would have been seeing these giant spikes. Basically, she was doing an incredibly difficult fart look on a day-to-day basis. So, number one, it shows how many douchebag men there are out there, but it also shows how women are very, very much more competitive in a lot of ways, as Jen and I were talking offline about this, than men actually are in some cases. The men is just an ego thing. For the women, it's much more sort of a primal, I can win too thing. It's not about an ego. It's more about winning and beating and fighting and showing. So, it's a really interesting thing. But ladies, let the men go because they're just being dumb. And men could be so stupid, right? I mean, basically, it was really eye-opening. It was my first two years of coaching that I finally, it took me two years to realize it. That's just how stupid I am. But I was like, why is this person not producing in races? And then I think I went and ran with her one day. I saw what was going on. I was like, oh, I should have seen this coming from a mile away.

Guys, no creeping up on the women. It is stupid. It's misogynistic. Let them go. Be proud.

And if they're wearing a TeamRogue shirt, you're going to get dropped anyway. So, leave it alone.

Let's quickly talk about safety. Because I think this is something, unfortunately, that probably impacts women more than men out there when they're running alone or at night or in any context. So what are your tips, Mallory, for running safety for women?

I don't run alone at night. I mean, if I'm going to go, there's definitely some times where, you know, as I'm a mom, the only time I really have available to go is late at night. And if I do that, then it's always with somebody else. And whether it's running from 7 p.m. to midnight or 3 a.m. to 6 a.m., I never, ever run with headphones. I'm always hyper aware of what's around me. I know my exits. I know kind of just my bearings. I mean, I'm out on the trail, so there's a little more of that. Nobody's going to drive by and see anything happen. So I'm always with somebody else. I also always tell at least Jason where I'm running. My predicted time is when I'm going to be done. And I feel like if I tell him I'm going to be done at 6 a.m. and I'm not calling, he's going to come out there and find whoever has taken me.

And you would not want to run into Jason. It's her husband.

Track you down.

I do the same. Well, I definitely let someone know where I'm going if I'm going to go by myself, but I do a lot of runs on my own. And I've done a lot of runs on my own at night. I try to also be hyper aware of my surroundings, never wear headphones, run in well. For me, I don't run on the trails, so I run in well lit areas. And I've always felt like neighborhoods, for whatever reason, are safer because I can always like go ram on someone's door if I'm in a situation where I'm not feeling safe or I could hide. But I just pay attention to the cars and to everything that's around me.

What about carrying pepper spray or something like that? Have you ever done that?

Yeah, I have. When I was in college, my mom made me carry pepper spray. And I never used it, luckily, but I heard that from a police officer that you actually are more likely to use it on yourself in a fight than on someone who's attacking you.

Spray yourself?

Yeah, because you just get scared and you freak out and you don't really know how to use it. And if you haven't practiced with it...

That's why I don't carry a gun.

I'd shoot myself.

I'd bring my own Secret Service agent.

But I could poke some guys out. I mean, I could hurt someone.

And if something happens, fight like hell, scream, fight back.

Always scream.

One of my clients was one of the Greenbelt... She was raped by one of the Greenbelt rapists. She was one of the victims. And just hearing her story and how it happened, how she was basically running, and he just came at her from the side and just tackled her. And she didn't know what was coming. And having that kind of sense of fear is healthy. And not to think that you're safe out there.

And always listen to your intuition.

Yes, if a guy looks creepy, he's probably creepy.

Always listen to your intuition because that's powerful.

Well, in women's intuition, in my experience, is a heightened awareness that's beyond what men can even understand. And so you all have an ability to sort of pick up on biorhythms or other things that are going on that then are typically not in tune with. So yes, women do that for sure. No doubt about it.

So I think what we've learned over the last hour and 20 minutes is that women are definitely the better sex.

Check. I'm in agreement with that. I've said it a million times. Women rule the world. Men just don't know it yet.

And we've got two of the most badass among them with us here, Jen and Mallory. Thank you for talking about these topics with us. Hopefully we've got both women and men still listening to us, although we might have scared the men off.

We lost them a while ago in that first question.

Yes. So anyway, thanks to you for joining us. We really appreciate it. And of course, thanks to everybody for listening. This is episode 16 of the Running Rogue podcast. As always, you can check us out on iTunes. You can also find us on the website, roguerunning.com or on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram at Rogue Running. We'll talk to you next time.

Later, later.

Bye.