Hey, everybody, welcome to episode 368 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung, coming to you from Austin, Texas, on an episode that will be released on Valentine's Day. Today, we're going to be talking about misperceptions about training that you may gather from social media after a relatively famous, you may have seen it back and forth on Twitter between Andrew Huberman and some running coaches about some of the things he said on a X-post recently, and maybe it went out on other platforms. But it sparked this desire for me to talk about some things you might misperceive because of social media. We'll get into that in just a second. First, a couple of quick notes. First of all, I wanted to thank you for your response to the episode last week with Deborah, the 75-year-old athlete who is just getting started in her running journey. I got a lot of good comments about that episode, and that came from people at all age groups that were inspired by her journey, and also could see commonalities to their own journeys based on listening to that conversation, even though the ages might be different. And to me, that was just a reminder of one of the things I love about the running community is how much we share in common. I think we all share much more in common than we have different, regardless of what part of the community we're participating in, or what our background in it might be, or what our pace might be, or whether you're front or back of the pack. I think we all have much more in common than we think. And then the other thing I wanted to remind you about before we start is just that for anybody who's looking for a coach, we have a lot of coaching options, especially virtual ones. We've got virtual group training, as well as virtual one-to-one training if that's of interest. You can always reach out to inquire about that by emailing coaching at roguerunning.com, or you can go to our website and get more information by going to our site at roguerunning.com and just clicking on that Train button at the top. So check it out. We've got virtual options. And then, of course, in-person options here in Austin and Dallas. So if you're interested in working with us, there are different pathways. So go check that out. Otherwise, we're going to jump into this topic today. And I've got I think it's nine different things that I want to talk about, things that you might misperceive about how running coaching works because of what we see on social media. And I want to first caveat this by saying, and I'm sure people will perhaps be frustrated with me as an old curmudgeon, but it's really not what this is about. I actually see a lot of value in social media in terms of what it provides to the running community and what it has inspired. And I've seen a massive increase in interest in running and running topics and in coaching. And certainly the next generation of runners, those in their 20s right now, are being inspired by many things they see on social from running influencers and all of that. And to me, that's one of the best things about what has happened with social media and running since the pandemic in particular, is that it's inspired a lot of people to get out and start and to be able to have access to information that they may not otherwise have. And so, that's all great. Love it. But I think also, even if we have the fundamentals in mind, there are things about what we see on social media that can warp our perspective, that could be just simply dead wrong, or that could perhaps be misleading and or cause us to be distracted and end up on a path that isn't necessarily fruitful. So I wanted to go through some of those thoughts today after being inspired to do this episode from an exchange I saw on X this week between Steve Magnus and Andrew Huberman, and also between Stage Canada, who's a trail runner and coach, and Andrew Huberman. For those that don't know Andrew Huberman, he's a PhD neurologist, has a podcast called the Huberman Lab, which I don't personally listen to, but sometimes I get exposed to for various reasons or see clips. And in general, I think his stuff is overall pretty great. You know, it certainly is motivated by the right things. It's science-backed, and he has on great guests. And generally, I think you can learn a lot from listening to Andrew Huberman. But in this particular case, I think I and others sort of disagreed with the perspective that went out via his social channels. And he was interviewing a guy by the name of Pavel Satsulin, which I may be mispronouncing that name. And overall, this podcast was on Building Strength Correctly, and there was a lot of good information in it. But the one nugget that he pulled out and shared and then ended up leading to this debate on social with some running coaches that I follow, he said, I asked Pavel Satsulin how to dramatically increase one's endurance and strength, not size in parentheses. He said, once a week, jog with a kettlebell weighing 30% of your body weight for one mile, switching which arm carries it at your side as needed, start slow, mentally brutal, fun works. And so we had some running coaches out there jumping on that workout and kind of pointing out the fact that that may not be necessarily the best workout for somebody to jump into for a lot of reasons. And certainly as it relates to endurance, that's not something I would ever recommend anyone do. One, especially jumping into it, I think that it will be quite dangerous as a starting place for most people. But also it doesn't, it isn't going to do the things that you needed to do if you're really trying to work on the long distances or even the short distance endurance-related events, mile 5K, 10K, etc. So, and look, I think that I don't think anything bad of Andrew Huberman. He was sharing a workout sort of out of context from the podcast, a much longer podcast conversation that he had on strength. Again, a lot of good information in there. I think to pull out this one nugget was kind of silly of him. And it put him in the crosshairs with some running coaches who were questioning that as a recommendation for anyone, much less anyone who's considering working on endurance. But it made me think broadly about what are some things that I see on social themes, trends that I think can be one, dangerous, or at worst, or at best, misleading, or might even warp your sense of reality, even if you have the fundamentals in mind about what you should be thinking about from a fundamental training perspective. Sometimes when we just see the same thing over again, it starts to warp our view, and maybe tempts us to do things that are potentially counterproductive. And so I've got a list of nine things, themes, these aren't shots at any one person, because again, in general, I think the trends of running and information available on social are mostly a positive thing, and mostly inspiring people to get out there and do big things. And I think all of that is great. But we've got to couch certain things that we see and make sure we can be discerning when we see it and not let it tempt us into doing things that are counterproductive at best and maybe dangerous at worst. So we'll go through these nine things, and we'll just kind of talk about it. And again, a lot of these are kind of going back to some of the fundamental reminders that I talk about across all of my shows. But hopefully it will allow you to, with the proper lens, view anything you're seeing on social media and couch it accordingly. So here we go, nine things to go through. Number one, I want to remind you that no one workout matters. And I don't want you taking a one-off workout from anybody and thinking either that it's the most important key workout to do something and certainly copying something like that out of context. I think that is all counterproductive, but you'll see things on social, including from well-meaning sources like Andrew Huberman. I think even Peter Atiyah talks about this 4x4 VO2 max workout that he kind of harps on. And there's nothing wrong necessarily with any one workout that you might hear about. But to think of it as the end-all and be-all or something that you should be doing repetitively, I think, is the dangerous part. Sometimes that's the perception is that either that workout is going to be some sort of miracle workout that's going to get you where you want to go, or there is something that you should be doing repetitively. Because even if we thought this Andrew Huberman carrying kettlebell workout was something that was good and you should be doing, I want to be doing that every single week, and certainly not every single week of the year, even if you were doing it in some sort of periodized way. Because we need variety. But the fundamental point here is that no one workout matters in the grand scheme. And please, please don't copy workouts from others out of context and just place it into your context without understanding how it should fit in what you're trying to do. Because out of context workouts put in the wrong place can be again dangerous on one hand and certainly counterproductive on another. And just remember that in the grand scheme of things, the fundamental principle that is accurate is that no workout matters. What matters is the body of work, your consistency over a period of not days, weeks, or even months, but rather years and ultimately decades. That's what matters. And I think it's very, very easy, whether you're looking at social or not, to forget that fundamental principle and think that I can steal this workout and insert it here and it'll have this amazing result. It'll be the game changer that fundamentally changes everything for me. Or I can take something and add it to what I'm doing and that'll be the game changer. No, that's not really it. If you're trying to be your best endurance running self, and for most of us, that means our fastest half marathons and marathons, then being consistent, especially with easy running, 80 to 90% of the time is actually what's going to get you there. No one speed workout, no one quality workout, no one strength workout is going to be the silver bullet for you in getting your goals. It's actually that day by day, easy running foundation that's going to get you most of the way there. And then the rest is all nuance, and it should be done in context to a plan that makes sense overall, both in the period of your life and the 12 to 18 month window that you're in, but also within the macro cycle you're in, and where your next big race or big goal might fall within that micro cycle. It all requires context, because one of the fundamentals is also periodization, and we want to periodize the work so that we're peaking on the day that matters. And if you're just doing the same thing every week, then you're not working in a periodized fashion in a way to peak. So there's a lot of things going on here, but the overall message is don't let social media get you to think or be diluted into the idea that there's a silver bullet workout that you need to steal and just place into your routine and do it every week, because that's just not how it works. The body of work is what matters. Any workout that you should insert should have context and fit within the periodized plan that you have put together for yourself, perhaps working with a coach. If you're not doing that, just ignore it. Just ignore it. And that's not to say you can't take information and say, hey, that's sometimes I'll see workouts, not usually on social media, but I'll see workouts from other coaches and I'll say, oh, that's a cool workout. It's another way to accomplish aerobic strength building or it's another way to accomplish a VO2 max stimulus or it's another way to work on race execution. And I'll see things like that and I'll follow it away and I'll steal it and I'll place it in the context that matters. I mean, most coaches have operated that way for decades of just sort of stealing things that they see from others and putting it in place in their own routines in the context that makes sense. So there you go. That's number one. Don't let social media woo you into thinking that there's magic workouts out there for you. Number two, there's a perception sometimes, I think, in the social world that you can take shortcuts. And oftentimes, people will call them hacks or biohacks, and you see that quite common out there. And I just fundamentally don't think there are any shortcuts if you want to build for long term potential. And I think with social, there will be this idea that if you do a silver bullet workout like we just talked about, or use a tool that you have to spend a lot of money on, or supplement in a certain way with certain products that are recommended out there, that those are going to somehow magically get you faster to your goal. And unfortunately, that's just not how human physiology works. As I've already said, you've got to build things gradually over time, and progress is measured not in days, weeks, or months, but rather in years and decades. And I think that's true not just in our sport as running, but in general with human physiology across most sporting-related pursuits. And that's not to say that you can't get near-term progress or near-term gains, certainly. People that get into running and start with a good foundation of easy running, they're going to see progress, and oftentimes you see very rapid progress if you apply those fundamental principles right away. But if you keep applying them, then you're going to at some point get to a place that you never thought possible, and then you're going to at some point get to a place that maybe you could never dream about, and then you're at some point going to perhaps reach those genetic limits that you start bumping up against. And then even when you get to that place, there's often ways that you can find additional seconds when it counts. So this idea that you can somehow shortcut anything via product, method, workout, or whatever, that kind of lives out there on social media in general, that's a concept that I think is just fundamentally wrong. And it's easy to be wooed into that. And I think in general, all of us know that it's not true, that there's a long-term perspective that matters. There's fundamentals. I mean, if you listen to this podcast, you know that there are fundamentals that matter. And the more we focus on the fundamentals and don't take shortcuts, the more we can reach our potential over time. But inevitably, because we're humans and we like shortcuts and we like to have a faster path to the thing that we want, it's easy to get tempted or wooed into thinking, well, maybe if I just do this one thing more, then it's going to unlock something I haven't been able to find otherwise on my own by listening to the fundamentals. And that's just unfortunately not how it works. So please do not let your mind be wooed by such things. But that is definitely a pervasive theme. Sometimes I think out there on social media is that there are hacks or shortcuts to get where you want to go. And it's just not true. It's just not true. It's not the way human physiology works. From an aerobic standpoint, from a strength standpoint, real magic, real potential is reached by not just years, but decades of doing the fundamentals right and doing them consistently. And that doesn't mean you have to be perfect along the way or that you can't have windows of time where you're focused on different things. It just means that you want to think long term in order to reach your potential, which to me is, I don't know, some people consider that discouraging. I consider that really exciting because it means that I can continue to get better and faster well into my lesser degree years of young and still see improvement, still go faster if I do the fundamentals right the right way and do them consistently. That to me is an encouraging message, not a discouraging one. Whereas I think social would have us believe that the only message or the only encouraging message is that if you just do it this way, it'll go faster. Well, don't think about going faster. Think about doing it the right way and then let the results and outcomes come in the way that they should. And if you do it that way, then you're going to ultimately reach more and bigger potential than if you try to take those hacks, those shortcuts along the way. So that's number two. Number three and relatedly is that the fundamentals of fitness are still king. The fundamentals of fitness are still king. And we're going to talk about the fundamentals of fitness, and we're going to talk about the fundamentals of recovery, kind of in back-to-back principles here. But the fundamentals of fitness, I think social media would have us believe that there are things, there are other things that matter when it comes to ultimately achieving your potential. And oftentimes those things are bundled up in hacks and shortcuts that we just talked about, but also just in things that are dead wrong. So, for example, you'll see a lot of things on social media that really glorify and lift up taking your body to the absolute limit and edge quite frequently as some picture of what it looks like to achieve results in fitness. That if you're not sort of the David Goggins sort of mentality, and you'll see it in a bunch of places, that if you're not going to the absolute limit all the time, then you're not doing hard enough, and you're not going to get your potential. And that's just fundamentally wrong. Or if you're not doing those crazy, intense HIIT workouts or crazy, intense spin classes, then you're not working hard enough. And this may just be a primarily American mentality on fitness. And so it's pervasive on social, but I think also pervasive in our perspective on a lot of things is that unless we're going to the absolute limit all the time and frequently, then we're not going to achieve our results. And again, just fundamentally wrong. It's actually about easy effort most of the time. Very occasionally going hard, but rarely when we go hard, going to the absolute limit. So probably 99.5% of the time you're running or doing a workout, you're actually not getting close to your limit on a given day. There's very, very few workouts that I give that would require somebody to be throwing up at the end of the workout, because that's just not how we build fitness. We build fitness and we build aerobic strength, and we build aerobic capacity by going easy, by doing things in a measured way, by actually staying in control, so that we can work on our body's ability to process lactate and do that efficiently and or reuse it as fuel. We're also staying away from the edge mostly, so that we can recover from the hard work and then come back and do it again, either via a long run or another quality workout. So it's actually about going to the edge very, very little, if you want to reach your max potential. And then obviously on race day, then you go to the limits. So to be honest, I often roll my eyes at these videos or workouts or people talking about doing these crazy, extreme things on social media. It's, it's, those are stunts, to be honest. Those are stunts to get eyeballs and views. They are not a fundamental part of what it takes to be your best half marathon or marathoning self. So please, you can be entertained by those things, but don't don't try to mimic them. Most of the time, it's about staying in control and then being consistent and healthy on the way, as we've already discussed, versus doing some of these crazy intense things and thinking that that's going to get you where you want. And in fact, it'll get you injured. It'll make, therefore, you be inconsistent. And it also suboptimizes when we go that hard all the time. It suboptimizes our aerobic capacity building, because we're always working on revving the engine and not on building the size of our engine. And we want a big engine more than we want an engine that's really, really revved up. So, please, ignore the crazy, intense workouts, and remember that the fundamentals of fitness still are king, even if they might be the boring stuff that doesn't play well on social media. So, that's number three. Number four, the fundamentals of recovery, I think, are often warped on social media. You see people talking about ice baths a lot. For example, you see people talking about certain protein powders and supplements and all sorts of things that try to purport to be about recovery, when really the fundamentals of recovery are all things you don't need to pay for. It's quality sleep, it's going easy with easy recovery, movement on those days after a hard workout or a long run, and it's about fueling the body well with plenty of well-balanced whole foods, particularly after intense sessions. Those are the building blocks of recovery. Those are all things that you should have access to without having to buy something being pitched on social media. And that's not to say there isn't a place for supplementation or there isn't a place for ice baths. But it's just it's not the fundamentals. It's not the core. It's not the one percent that are going to matter. It's actually if you're doing the fundamental things right, those are the things that are going to get you most of the way to recovery. And yet people want to skip those things and just short circuit to the thing that they bought on Instagram because it makes them feel better versus actually creating space for something like more sleep, which I know can be challenging. I'm not undermining it. Something I've struggled with for a long time. But if you're not getting that right, then you really shouldn't be worrying about the other stuff. So ignore all the things you're being pushed on social media about recovery. And I'll give you just an aside about ice baths in particular. The science related to ice baths and recovery is not very good. And that's been aware. We've been aware of that for a while. Now, there are things that ice bath or cold exposure can be good for if given in the right doses. And if you're interested in looking at more information on that, I would highly encourage a follow of Dr. Susanna Soberg, S-O-E-B-E-R-G, on Instagram. She is a Danish scientist who has really unlocked the formulas and benefits around cold exposure by studying cold water, swimmers, actually, in Denmark. And I think has the best advice I've seen on how to use cold exposure to your advantage if you're interested in it. And just to give you a quick highlight, it's small doses, three times a week, 11 minutes total recommended, not extreme temperatures. You could be in something 50 to 55 degrees Fahrenheit and still get the benefits in relatively short doses that will help with metabolism, with the body's stress response, and a host of other things that she talks about. But it's not something that you have to do every day or do in extreme cold. And I would submit that it's not necessarily a factor to worry about until you've got some of the other fundamentals nailed down. But if you're interested in learning more about that particular topic, then I highly recommend Dr. Susanna Soberg. She also, by the way, talks about heat exposure as well. And so there's a lot on her page and channel, and she has a whole course that you can find online on her site if you're interested in going down that path. But it's not as simple as perhaps social media would have you believe. So that's number four. Number five, speaking of training fundamentals, you'll hear a lot on social media about Zone 2. So much that I did a whole episode on the myths about Zone 2 training, episode 344, if you want to go back and look at that. I had to bring it back here because it's something I still see, talked about on social and something I still see, talked about in the wrong ways. Again, the fundamentals of Zone 2 training are all solid and valid, and you need to have really, really solid volume and consistency in the lower intensities. But I think the messaging on it has been oversimplified in the social media sense. And so I would highly encourage you to go back to listen to that episode 344. If you're curious about it, one message in there is that Zone 1 is actually in my mind more important than Zone 2. And so it's not just about trying to reach some narrow range of heart rates that are considered Zone 2, but rather actually spending time in the lower heart rates as well in Zone 1. Not necessarily that you have to track heart rate every time. You can really do it by effort if you're willing to pay attention to how you're feeling out there. But there's a spectrum here, and we want to make sure you're getting Zone 1 time as well as Zone 2 time when it comes to building that easy, consistent conversational volume, which is essentially what's being talked about in an oversimplified way when we talk about Zone 2. And then also, I talk a lot about how do you actually know what that means and what it looks like. And I think there's a perception that there's this narrow heart rate range that you need to be operating in. And I think it's actually broader than that and a little more forgiving than that if you're willing to explore those lower intensities in Zone 1 as I just talked about. So, don't let the conversations about Zone 2 on social distract you, that it's a more nuanced conversation to be had than perhaps social would imply. The fundamentals there are good, and I think well-meaning, but if you oversimplified, it can be a little bit suboptimal. So, just pay attention to that when you see it, and certainly go get educated with my episode 344 if you haven't already listened to that. So, that's number five. Number six is this perception on social media that you have to be racing a lot in order to, I don't know, be a cool kid or not to miss out, or perhaps to achieve some sort of optimal performance. But I just want to remind you that focusing in races and choosing an A race and really focusing your training and periodization to focus on that A race and to get the optimal result on that A race is still going to be the optimal way to reach your max potential. We see a lot of running influencers out there for good reason doing a bunch of different races. They're doing a bunch of different races because they're getting paid to show up at these races and create content so those races have a marketing vehicle to spread the word. And while that is great for races and for people to participate in our sport, it is not, and in fact, it's far from not optimal for you to reach your max potential in the sport. If we want to peak, if we want to get the most out of ourselves, then we shouldn't be peaking more than two to three times per year. And you might see these people go and do races and do quite well by perhaps external definitions in some of these races. But I can tell you they're also not reaching their max potential. They might be doing quote well by certain external definitions, but the real question is what could they be doing if they were focused? They'd be doing actually much faster. And so if you want to reach your max potential, if you want to see what you can achieve and get the most out of yourself, then it's going to require focus, a singular A race within a five-ish month period of time that is periodized and planned for appropriately. And sure, you might do races on the path to that as prep races, but all signs point to building fitness for that A race. And even those prep races or training races should all be participated in and structured so that it's additive, so that it builds towards your primary race. Otherwise, it will take away from it. But I get it. When you're on social and you see these influencers doing all these races and you have FOMO, Fear of Missing Out, because you want to participate too and have fun and be a part of it with the, quote, cool kids, then you want to go do it and you want to race a lot. And that's, I understand. I understand the pull. But please, if you want to get the most out of yourself, if you want to see your max potential, please limit those peaks. And if you're going to do a bunch of races, that's fine. But make sure they're all additive in a way towards your A race, which might mean if you're doing races, some of them you do just easy as a long run. Some of them you might do with a specific workout in mind, but they all need to point to that A race in a way that is additive so that it doesn't take away from that peak potential, that peak performance, because it's not as it seems from the social influencers who are doing all these races. And I get it why they're doing it. They get paid to do it, but it's not going to be the thing that's optimal for you. So focus, focus, focus in your racing, and don't let social media FOMO pull you out of that. Relatedly, I think there's this perception on social media that you have to do world majors or do these big, cool races in order to be cool or feel relevant in the sport. And while I love our major marathons and while I love our big races, I just want you to know that you don't have to do those necessarily in order to be relevant in this sport. If you want to, great. But it is interesting to me the fascination that the running community has now with doing the world majors. Personally, that's not something that motivates me. I understand why it's motivating for others, and I'm fully supportive if that's your goal. But I also think that the social media influencing space has gotten us to this place where we think that if we're not striving to achieve the world, all the world marathon majors, then somehow our goals aren't big enough or relevant enough. Or there's, to me, maybe perhaps a little bit of an over emphasis on that because it's expensive for most people. It's hard to get into these races, to travel to them takes time, and it takes a lot of money. And so, again, don't want to bash it at all. If that's your goal, love it, great, please, go do it. But it doesn't have to be your goal if that's not your goal. There's a lot of great smaller races, a lot of great local races, a lot of things that are really powerful and relevant in this sport that are just as cool, in my mind, as going and doing all of the world majors. The other thing about that world major pursuit is that running the world majors isn't necessarily compatible with reaching your fastest marathon times because of the travel involved, the logistics involved, the crowdedness of those races and the logistics you have to manage around them. It's not necessarily conducive to running your fastest and best race. That's not to say you can't run fast there. That's to say you can't set a PR in your journey on the world majors, but you have to really think about how you manage all the variables around a world major because they're definitely complex and more complex than waking up and just doing your local race. So this point isn't to bash the pursuit, but it is just to remind us all that if our passion is a small local race or our passion is a race that you don't necessarily see influencers running on social media or that isn't a part of the world majors, then your path is still relevant and powerful and cool in my mind. So don't feel like you have to want to go do those things in order to be relevant in this sport. If you do, great, love it, let's go get it. But if not, it's okay. You still have worthy and meaningful goals and you can still do some really cool things in this sport. So keep that in mind, please. So that's number seven. Number eight is that I believe that specialization is required if you want to reach your max potential, whereas I think social media would have you believe, especially with the advent of the hybrid athlete sort of concept. I think they would have you believe that you can kind of have it all. And I'm not saying you shouldn't be doing strength if you're focused on running. But if you want to be your best marathoning self, strength will be a supplement to that. And you're not necessarily going to be the perfect hybrid athlete who can go and do a high rocks and perform well at it. That's not to say that that isn't a worthy pursuit as well. I coached an athlete, shout out to Stuart from the UK, who is a podium in his age group or finished podium in his age group at the High Rocks World Championships several years ago. So I've coached that type of athlete. I know what that is and what that looks like. But if you're going to be your best self at high rocks or a strength or a strength thing, then you need to be focusing on that. You need to be specializing on that. If you want to reach your max potential in that. Same with running. If you want to be your best marathoning self, it's going to require you to focus on that, to specialize in endurance training, which doesn't mean, as you know, doing all marathons, but it means working more on running than on strength and using strength as a supplemental tool. I love the hybrid athlete concept because it helps remind us that balance matters, that strength is important. And I think for perhaps periods of distance running coaching, it's been de-emphasized in a way that maybe it shouldn't have been. And yes, it's a part of what I believe every distance runner's routine should include, but as a supplemental tool, as I talked about in episode 361. And so if you want to be your best running self, you have to specialize as a runner. Strength should be supplemental. If you want to be your best high rock self, then you need to be doing both things in a balanced way, and probably doing more strength than a runner who's more focused on performing at the half marathon or marathon. It's going to look different. Some of the fundamentals are the same, by the way, from a running perspective, but it's going to be more strength than a runner who's focused just on running marathons, and certainly more specialized work related to those high rock strength related events. But if you want to be your best high rocks athlete, you need to focus on high rocks. If you want to be your best strength athlete in another capacity, then you should be focused more on strength. And so don't forget that that specialization matters, and there may be windows of time where you're focused more on one thing than the other. But if you care most about getting your best out of your running self, then you'll specialize there. You'll spend time there. You'll make sure all of your other work supplements that. And that is your priority versus constantly mixing it up. And look, if variety is your goal, and you want to mix it up for the sake of variety, and that's what keeps you motivated, then fine. But also recognize there's a trade-off between that and reaching your max potential in the thing that you're unwilling to specialize in for whatever reason. Might be a valid reason, but it's also the reality of making that choice. So just know that specialization still matters. Love the hybrid concept that exists out there, but most of you, if you're going to be your best running selves, are not going to be the definition of a hybrid athlete that we see on social media, and that's okay. So that's number eight. Number nine, the last one, I think, related to number eight, is that you don't have to look a certain way to perform at amazing levels in our sport. I know image is so much on social, and we get lured into it, and we think we have to match our body type to someone we see on social media. And please, please, please don't let that be the trap that you get in. I understand why that's a trap for many of us, because we are folks that are driven by aesthetic, by look, but it is a dangerous trap for so many reasons. One, because we are all different, and our bodies are all different, and they are going to perform in different ways, and that's okay. It's also important for you to make sure that you are performing in a way that works for your body. So remember, if you go to a marathon and you watch people at all paces, you are going to see all versions of runners, shapes, sizes, backgrounds, at all levels throughout the race, front to back. It's going to look different. It's going to look different. The form is going to be different. Everything is going to be different. It's going to be so many differences. And to me, that is the ultimate celebration of how we can all come from a different starting place, and we can do the work, we can use these fundamentals that work for all of us, and we can then go achieve and do cool things. And it doesn't have to look the same for everybody. The fundamental training principles, I think, are more or less the same for humans, but it doesn't mean that that manifests a look that is something you should be trying to match, or copy, or even use as inspiration from social. I think that can be dangerous. So please just remember that all those visuals we see on social about how people look and the perfect bodies and all that stuff, it is so, so, so misleading. Those perfect bodies are not pictures of health necessarily. They are not pictures of speed. They are not perfect pictures necessarily of goals and achievement. Fitness does not have a look, so don't let social media tempt you to think otherwise. You focus on your journey. You focus on executing these fundamentals for you, and you are going to look how you look. It is not really important. What is important is the times that you achieve, the results that come, and the journey you are on to be your best running self. That is what matters, and it can be so easy to be tempted to look at other things or to focus too much on aesthetic when we are looking at social media. And to me, that isn't helpful or productive for any of us. So remember that. Number nine, I'm going to end on that one. So again, the nine things to avoid from a social media perspective, one, no one workout matters. There are no magic workouts, no silver bullets out there. Two, there are no shortcuts. Three, the fundamentals of fitness are still king. It's not the hard and fast and vomit-inducing workouts that work. The fundamentals of recovery are also still king. Number four, number five, zone two is an oversimplification. So listen to episode 344 and make sure you have that right in your head. Number six, it's important to focus in your racing to get the best results. Ignore that FOMO. Number seven, you don't have to do the world majors to be cool or to do races that are relevant. Number eight, specialization is required to get your max potential. And number nine, the final reminder, you don't have to look a certain way to perform and to achieve your goals. So don't let social media tempt you otherwise. And that's it. That's this episode. Hopefully, you listened and couched this in the right way. Again, I'm not throwing stones, but just trying to build some, pull some themes out that can bring us back to the things that really matter when we get stuck on social media or when our mind gets twisted or we get tempted to think a different way because of the things that we're barraged with on Instagram. So hopefully, that's a helpful reminder. As always, thanks for listening. You can check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Instagram or Facebook at RogueRunning. We'll talk to you next week.