Hey everybody, welcome to episode 352 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung, coming to you from a wet and rainy day here in Austin, Texas. Excited to be back with you. Going to be talking about some key things to do and avoid as a part of your look ahead to fall races. Tomorrow, Saturday, May 4th, here in Austin, we kick off our training for fall races, gearing up for everything from September to December in various formats, half marathons, full marathon, speed tracks. We've got all of it both in our in-person groups as well as in our virtual groups. And as I also talked about on some of the virtual workshops that I just hosted, there are definitely things to focus on and keys to running your best half marathon or full marathon in the fall. So I'm going to give a highlight of those conversations. And in particular, talk about both the do's and the pitfalls associated with those do's. I've got five categories that I'm going to be talking about. And I will cover a lot of the mistakes that I see people make in those categories. So we'll get to that in just a second. But first, before I get there, I want to thank John G, my sponsor for this episode, John G. Running Apparel. I've been working with them for more than a year now. Really appreciate that partnership. I'll talk more about them mid episode. Also just wanted to give you guys a heads up for those that might be interested in our virtual programming. We do have options both available now and opening soon if you're interested in training with us for a fall race. We've got both virtual groups as well as virtual one-to-one options. And then of course, in-person training here in Austin Cedar Park, and then in three different locations in Dallas, Central near Mockingbird in 75, Richardson and Coppell. So if you want to join with us in person in either of those locations, you can do it, or you can train with us virtually. We've got two virtual groups, Rogue Rising and Rogue Renegades. Both available to really meet the spectrum of wherever your starting point might be as you gear up for fall races. And then of course, we've got Rogue Virtual Coaching from a one-to-one standpoint for those that want that high touch, very personalized, very tailored experience. All of those options are available now, except for Rogue Renegades, which is the virtual group that I lead. That one's gonna be opening up on June 1st. So coming up here in about a month. If you're interested in any of those things or have more questions or wanna know how it might apply to you, then you can email us at the email, coaching at roguerunning.com. Again, Rogue is spelled R-O-G-U-E, running.com. So coaching at roguerunning.com. If you email that, if you have questions about any of those options, we can get you that information. So go check it out. So that's all I got for an intro. Let's jump into my main topic. Again, we're gonna be talking about the do's and the don'ts in prepping for a fall race. This content comes from, partially from the conversations that I had with the virtual workshops that I just hosted. Had over 20 listeners join me on those workshops, which were really fun because we got to, because they were small format, we got to dig into people's individual questions and stories, and really take some of these principles and apply them in specific to those individuals and to the cases and races that they were gearing up for. So a lot of fun, really appreciate those who jumped on with me for those chats. I'll definitely do them again, but for those that didn't join me there, then you're gonna get a summary of it in this podcast. So I've got five different areas that I think are keys for you to get the best out of yourself for your fall half marathon or marathon. And with each of those five categories, I'm also gonna talk about some of the pitfalls that I see, the mistakes that I see people make along each of those categories. So let's jump in to number one. Number one, you've heard me talk about on this podcast before, but I want you to really listen this time and take it to heart because I think people hear this and either dismiss it or think about it at the surface level. And this is something that I think takes time to really understand in the context of your life, your training. And number one is simply purpose, developing a really sharp, prioritized view of why your goal matters. Now, it's really important to distinguish between the reasons why you run and the reasons why you want your specific goal. There might be some overlap, but oftentimes there's not. There are reasons to run that people often talk about that include physical fitness or health, perhaps stress relief, perhaps community and being able to spend time with others. Those are all good reasons to run. But when it comes to wanting a specific goal, you can get all of those benefits without having to work hard in training. You can run casually. You don't necessarily have to sign up for races. You don't have to go to the pain cave. You don't even have to have goals to be able to get the benefits of stress relief, of physical health, of community. You could do it casually, do it for fun. And by the way, there's nothing wrong with that. But when people come to me, when they listen to a podcast like mine, when they come to a place like Rogue, where they're seeking specific coaching, usually it's because they, you, listening, are not satisfied with the status quo. You are running from the status quo. You want something more. You want to be challenged. You want to test yourself. You want to find your limits and press beyond them. You want to see what happens when you get to that dark space, and how do you respond? How do you come through it? You want to see what happens when you challenge yourself to seek a goal that perhaps you don't think is possible, but are able to through work, through process, through commitment, you're able to get that anyway. So that category of desire, of motivation, of resilience, in having the focus towards the goal requires reasons for doing it that are higher level than just those general benefits from running or any movement practice. So what I encourage people to do is really dig deep, not just about coming up a list of reasons why you run. By the way, those can all be valid and true at the very same time while also being really crystal clear about what your purpose is. And people are gonna perhaps roll their eyes, think this is cheesy stuff. But the reason I want you to do this is because of two things. One is when you have a really crystal clear reason for wanting your goal, that becomes fuel for the fire, gasoline for the fire, kindling for the fire that allows you to withstand the dips in motivation, the challenges along the way, the injuries that may happen. Whatever might get in your way, the alarm clock you don't wanna wake up to, whatever might get in your way, that becomes fuel for the fire that you can go to that's real, that's palpable to get you through those difficult times. So that's one reason. Another reason is because it helps you inform the goal you really want and give you focus towards that goal that might allow you to get there faster because you're pushing away the distractions because you've spent the time to understand what you really want and why. And therefore, when you have FOMO, fear of missing out in life, you can say, no, I'm good. I can skip that because I know what my higher purpose is, my higher goal is. I know what is most important. I'm gonna focus there. So it allows you to crowd out that other stuff that might creep in because you have a crystal clear picture. So what does that look like? It looks like being able to finish the statement, I want my goal because dot dot dot with five to 10 words. Not five reasons, but one reason. I want my goal because dot dot dot. You should be able to finish that sentence in a succinct way. Post that somewhere. Prominent bathroom mirror, refrigerator, car dash, put it on your notebook at work, whatever it may be so that you can be constantly reminded of the reason why you want the big thing that you want. Fuel for the fire. Now, most people can't do this easily, and that is normal. In fact, this should be really challenging. This shouldn't be something that you can just think about briefly and then come up with a great answer. This should be something that you have to spend time on, that you have to dig underneath, that you have to write down a draft of, let it sit and marinate and then come back and change it. Change it and update it. That you have to say, Hey, is there something more? And dig deeper and deeper until you get to that really fundamental reason. And I find that it's really difficult to do. It takes some time, takes some processing, some marinating on it, perhaps some writing, some drafts that end up not being exactly right. So you can really refine it and put a sharper point on this purpose. So this isn't something that will be easy. It's going to take something. It's going to be something that takes time. And it's going to be something that requires really strong prioritization from your perspective, because a lot of people can sit there and then come up with maybe two or three or four things of reasons why they do something or why they want it. I want you to pick the number one thing, the most important thing, the thing that's most directly correlated to the reasons why you want that goal, whether it be to run a distance you've never run, whether it be to run a time you've never run, to run a personal best, to Boston qualify, to whatever it may be across whatever race distance you want. You want a sharp perspective of, I want this goal because... If you can finish that sentence succinctly, try it on for size and have it stand the test of time, then you've got your mission accomplished. Now, I would also submit that if you're going to do that, it's likely something that you can't do alone. It's likely something that you can't do alone. You need somebody who can hold a mirror up to you and help you test the words, test the concepts, test the ideas. And this person should know you well, but could also be a coach who's trained in helping push you to the point of really understanding what you want. Certainly, I'm somebody that can do that. Our coaches can do that. But if you don't have a coach, that's okay. Talk to your partner, your spouse, your friends that know you, your running partners. Go to people that know you well, that understand your goals, that understand your journey, who you can share this with, who can help you put a sharper point on it and be that sounding board, that mirror for you that will help you get to the real reason. Now, a couple of things that I see in this area that are pitfalls, one I already mentioned is, again, just somebody not spending the time, because you're not going to get this to the place of power that it needs to be by doing this quickly. This is going to take some time. It's going to take some meditation. It's going to take some thinking, but also drafting and refining. And it might take three or four weeks of really getting to something that you like, that fits, that also stands the test of your friends and others around you that know you well. So take the time. Another pitfall I see people make is following others and essentially copying the things that they want. So for example, I talked about Boston in my last episode. It's a great goal. It's a worthy goal. It doesn't have to be everybody's goal, and that's okay. And it's, as I've mentioned, it's like our amateur Olympics, and there's a beautiful thing about that, and I love the environment. I love what it represents. But there's a lot of people who want Boston because other people want Boston, and they don't understand their personal relationship with that goal. Or maybe it's another time barrier, like breaking a five-hour or four-hour or three-hour marathon, or a two-hour half marathon, or a 90-minute half marathon, or a two-hour, two-and-a-half-hour half marathon. Whatever that barrier might be, maybe you want it because somebody else has done it. And that's okay, that's a perfectly fine gateway to a goal to develop that interest. But I would submit that you need to make it personal from that point forward and really, really dive in on why you want it specifically. What's your personal relationship with that goal? So that you can finish that sentence, I want this goal because, and that's going to look different than your friend's answer who might have a similar goal. If it doesn't look different, then you're probably not digging deep enough. So that's another thing to avoid is the copycat sort of potential that you have with this. Another pitfall along the way which is related to that is this idea that you have to rely on somebody else's motivation or interest to sustain you. So I see people, some people get involved in our programming who might get involved because a friend's doing it or because a partner or spouse is doing it or because somebody else got them into it. And again, that's a perfectly fine gateway to a goal or to a movement practice, but eventually you have to understand why you specifically want to do it. So you can't just piggyback off of somebody else's motivation or wanting to prove somebody else wrong. You really need to understand internally what's that intrinsic motivation that's going to get you moving when it gets hard, when the weather sucks outside, when it feels too early for that alarm to go off, when your knee hurts and you have to do prehab and rehab to work through it, which derails your training, when you get sick and you have to take a few days off and then you have to keep that momentum beyond that, or when it gets to those hard workouts and you don't want to do them or you're scared of them. What are you going to look back to? And then when you get to race day, as I've talked about in recent episodes, what are you going to lean on when it gets tough at mile 10 of a half marathon or mile 22 of a marathon when the pain kicks in and the devil in your shoulders tells you to slow down because it will make it feel better? What are you going to lean on? And I promise you, there's nothing stronger to lean on than having a crystal clear picture of your purpose. When you're between seasons like many of you are now, as you're transitioning from perhaps racing in the spring to transitioning on focusing on fall races, this is a perfect time to look at that, to do it for the first time if you never have, or to reassess your purpose if you've already done it, because this will evolve over time. And by the way, if you just got a goal in a spring race, perhaps you got the exact thing you were wanting, then this is more important than ever. Because one of the things I often see when people get a goal is that they then struggle and languish because now they've lost the connection of purpose and goal. They got the thing they wanted, they don't know what the next thing is, and they may not know, and or their reasons might change as to why they want that next goal. So that's a really important time to go through this exercise. But don't rush it, take your time with it, test it with others that you know and know you well, and don't settle for doing this quickly. Spend the right amount of time with it. And when you have that thing, that you can finish that sentence on why you want the goal, post it everywhere you can, use it as fuel for the fire. It's the spark that's going to keep you going. So that's my number one thing to look at, reassess, do for the first time as you prep for fall races. Number two, I've already used this word once in this podcast, but I think it's absolutely critical, and that's I want you to have focus. I want you to have focus. And by focus, I mean a few things. One, I'm talking about focusing on one peak for the fall, one single peak A race that you can circle in the calendar in bold, you can highlight in yellow, that you can gear everything you do between now and then towards that main race. So focus, peaking. In addition, having a long-term focus on understanding what the big, big goal is. Maybe you can't get what you want in this next race. Maybe it's going to take some time. Maybe it's going to take two or three years to get where you want to go. Well, then how are you focusing over the next 18 months to cobble together blocks of training that are going to be additive, that are going to build one upon the other so that you can get that goal more quickly than if you dance around and bounce around and follow the latest thing that others are doing, the FOMO, so to speak. I want you to focus both within this season and then across seasons so that you can methodically build the skills you need to get the things that you want. So focus. One peak race for the fall. Now, what this means is it doesn't mean you don't have to do any other races or you can't do any other races. It just means that if you're going to do other races, then they should all point to your A race in a way that's additive. So if you're going to do a half marathon, perhaps you could consider a 10K, four to six weeks out, from that half marathon as an all-out 10K that could be a nice stepping stone to see what's possible in the half and also a good training stimulus for the half. That's a good window. But outside of the window, probably doesn't make sense to race a 10K all out. And even in that window, you still have to ask yourself, is it the right thing to race this all out? Or perhaps you could treat it as some sort of training race or workout, depending on how you're feeling, depending on how the body's going, depending on how the body's feeling, depending on how the cycle's going. You might still choose to not race it all out. And for a marathon, four to eight weeks out from that, you might consider a half marathon to race all out or treat it as a training race. But either way, it should be additive. It should be a building block to the big goal and not something that detracts or takes away from it. So focus, pick your A race, then very carefully assemble the prep races, if any, before that. And by the way, you don't necessarily have to do them to still have a great outcome. And then also focus your training and periodization to allow you to peak on that day, which means you're going to build your priming or base phase right now in a way that then leads nicely into a strength phase, that then leads into a race-specific phase, and then leads into a specific taper towards that A race. All of those phases stacking one upon another to build the right system at the right time so that you peak when it matters on one big day. And yes, I know what people say. They say, well, isn't it dangerous to put all my eggs in one basket? It's not necessarily dangerous. That's probably not the right word. But it's scary. Because what if it's bad weather that day? What if you get sick that week? What if something happens? What if? I mean, all of those things can happen. But I would submit that if you want to get the most from yourself, then you're going to be willing to put all your eggs in that basket, or a single basket. If not, then you might get to a peak, but it will be a lower peak. So the question is all about risk reward. If you want the most reward, then you have to put more risk on one single day, especially as it relates to the half marathon and the marathon. That's just the way it is for the longer distances. If you're doing 5Ks or 10Ks, because of the recovery time, you can get more at the end of a season, maybe up to three races. Over the half and the full, you have to focus. And if you don't focus, then you won't get the most out of it. So what are some of the pitfalls here relative to focusing? One, the natural contrast to what I mentioned about prep races, and that's somebody who's doing a bunch of races that are starting to step on your A race. You're over racing. Sometimes that's driven by FOMO. Sometimes that's driven by insecurity of somebody needing confirmation. And so they race a lot to try to constantly prove to themselves that what they want in their A race is possible. And that's a recipe for not getting what you want in your A race, so please don't do that. So don't over race. If you're going to race, that's fine, but pick the right window, as I said, for the timing of it, and make sure that it fits in a way that's additive toward your A race. Be willing, if needed, to turn something into a training race or a long workout instead, or even, if you want to do something, go out there and fun run it. Treat it as a long run, or another easy day depending on the distance. That just becomes another piece of that training puzzle that builds to the A race. So that's one big pitfall. Another big pitfall in this area would be somebody who doesn't give themselves enough time between cycles to properly detrain in order to retrain to a higher place. So there's going to be a lot of people right now that just raced in the spring. Maybe you just did Eugene. Maybe you've got Vancouver coming up this weekend. Maybe you did Boston. And I want you to resist the temptation to quickly jump into the next thing. You need to give yourself at least three weeks for a full marathon, at least one to two weeks for a half, to take it easy, to maybe run and keep it super mellow, but don't do workouts. Run basically only as you want to. Allow yourself to not only recover, but detrain from your spring peak properly and fully in order to get to a higher peak in the fall. If you don't properly let your body cycle, then you can't get to a higher peak in the fall. Training gains are not linear, unfortunately. They don't just go up and to the right. You have to detrain. Let your body hit a little bit of a valley between cycles so that you can then properly stacking together training phases, periods, again, in order to rebuild to a higher place. That's just the way our human body works. You have to hit that interim valley before you get to that higher peak. And if you don't allow yourself to do that, then you won't get to a higher peak. You might burn out mentally, you might burn out physically, but either way, you're going to miss the mark if you just try to keep rolling right on through. And I understand the reasons why we want that. We want to hang on to that super sharp fitness edge that we have from the spring, but you just can't do it. It's not physically possible, and also doesn't allow you to get to that higher place if you don't properly give yourself that break, physically and mentally. So give yourself that space before you restart again. And the third mistake I see people make is not properly periodizing their training cycle in order to build to that higher peak, as I mentioned, base and priming to start. That's what you should be thinking about right now. Nothing crazy, getting that volume established, doing light workouts with plenty of recovery just to prime the system for what's to come. Then going into your strength phase where you're working on aerobic strength and power, pills, long tempo type workouts, things that build your staying power, your endurance. Then we go into that third phase, race specific, where you're working on only on race pace, but also on paces that are faster than race pace to make race pace feel easier and then taper so that you're sharp and rested and ready for race day itself. Make sure that sequence flows in that order and gives proper space and due to each period. You can't rush it, but people want to. They want to jump right into marathon workouts here in June or July, and that's just not how it works. You're right into half specific workouts early in the cycle, and that's just not how our physiological works. You have to build in a periodized fashion. So give yourself that ability to focus and then sequence the process in the right way in order to build to that A-race, that single circled highlighted A-race in the fall. That's number two. Number three, consistency trumps all. Sear this into your brain. More important than any single run or workout is the body of work, the overall consistency, your ability to, as consistently as you can, deliver pass-fail on running days. It doesn't mean, by the way, that you have to be perfect. You don't. But you want to try to hit 90% to 95% of those days, and you don't have to be heroic about it. You don't have to crush the days. You just have to show up, do the work, get it done. And on those days when you can't do the full plan, doing something is light years better than doing nothing. So prioritize consistency and establish a winning process and routine that's going to allow you to be your best self. And I would submit that looks like a few things. One looks like running at least five or six days a week because the more running days you can get, the more likely you are to have the aerobic volume you need, to have the staying power you need, the aerobic capacity you need in order to get the goals that you want. And people that tell me, I can't run that many days, well, that's probably because you're running them too fast. Don't worry, we'll talk about pace. But first, establish more days. Secondly, make sure that you're able to label and understand the purpose for each day. If you're doing a five-day training week, then that should have, from my perspective, five types of days. Well, really four types of days. And that would include one speed workout, one medium long run, one long run, and two recovery days. One of those recovery days after your speed workout, one of those recovery days after your long run, and then the medium long run in between. You should know and have an established routine that lays that out. Now, it doesn't mean you're always nailing it because sometimes we have to move things around. I totally get that. But you should know what Monday is. You should know what Tuesday is. You should know what Wednesday is. You should be able to label it in one of those ways, which therefore means it has a purpose, and then you should go about fulfilling that purpose on that day to the best of your ability from week to week. And if you can keep stacking weeks structured like that, then I promise you, regardless of what your speed workouts look like, you're likely going to be able to have success when it comes to a race in the fall because you have that consistency, that foundation of aerobic development from the consistent days that are the building blocks to success. Can you label your days? Do you know what they are, what they represent? And to give some examples, and these are not exhaustive by any stretch, but two examples in how we structure things for some people in our programming. One would be Monday, medium-long run. Tuesday, either a flex off or cross-training day. Wednesday, speed workout. Thursday, recovery. Friday, off. Saturday, long run. Sunday, recovery. It's five days, has all the categories that I mentioned. Structured in a way that's going to set you up for success. Another way. Monday, easy or flex day. Tuesday, quality. Wednesday, recovery. Thursday, medium-long run. Friday, off. Saturday, long run. Sunday, recovery, run. That's another way you can structure things. How do you structure it? What works for you? And the rules are, have those days. Put your recovery days after the workouts and the long runs. Fit your other medium-long run somewhere else, and you might have a third recovery day, which would fit after the medium-long run if you're doing six days a week. But how can you deliver on that structure? Week in, week out, as consistently as possible. That's more important than the makeup of your quality workouts. So what are some of the pitfalls or mistakes that I see people make from this perspective? One is that they will tell me that they can't run more than four days a week or three days a week. They say, I just can't do it. Well, I'm here to tell you that you can. Usually that means prioritizing the time and also making sure you're going easy enough on most of those days. Because more running, in my experience, for those that are doing it at the right paces, actually ends up making you more resilient to injury than if you're doing fewer days because it allows you to build that movement, routine, and practice that gives you the resilience in your muscles to withstand the work. It doesn't work if you go too fast. Then you put too much stress on the overall system. So instead of doing that, keep those easy runs easy, keep those recovery runs even easier, and that will create a sustainable, consistent routine for you that will allow you to stay injury-free, doing more running than you're currently doing. So that's one thing. Another pitfall I see is that people do too much quality. So their routine is established around two quality days instead of one. So what they end up with is a really highly revved-up engine that's a lot smaller than those that are running easy, especially incorporating that medium-long run. I consider the medium-long run the unsung hero of half-marathon and marathon fitness because it's that other easy aerobic run with that outsized benefit in later miles that allows you that staying power in a long race because it is in the sweet spot of aerobic capacity building that gives you a big engine. And you want a V8, you don't want a four-cylinder, and the key to getting that V8 is more easy running, particularly that medium-long run, versus that second quality. The second quality gives you a really revved-up four-cylinder, which might get you some short-term results, short-term gains, but it's going to limit you in the long term. It also puts you at more risk for injury, which then compromises your ability to be consistent. So don't do two qualities. There's a space for it down the road, perhaps, for the most experienced athletes, but even in those situations, you want it to be very targeted. For most of us, one quality a week is not only the most sustainable, but it's also the pathway to reaching your most potential. So that's another thing I see. And then, thirdly, one of the pitfalls I see is just inconsistency. You know, it's okay to miss a run here or there. That happens. But if you are unable to stack together consistent weeks for whatever reason, because you haven't established that prioritized routine, then it's going to limit your ability to get your A-race. And that's okay. There are seasons of life where that happens. But I'm here to submit that when you're in a window where you really want something, going back to having a sharp purpose around it, you're going to be motivated to get out there and do the work and do it consistently. And again, it doesn't mean you have to be perfect, but it does mean you need to hit 90, 95% of the time if you really want the thing that you said you want. So be consistent. Okay, before we get to number four, I want to talk about my sponsor for this episode, Run John G. In fact, I'm excited because they just released a couple of new prints and artwork that I'm really excited about. I actually got an order on the way right now, including a new set of a racing kit, singlet and half tights for me. That looks really, really cool, so I would encourage you to go check out their site right now because they've got some new designs that I think are really cool. If you just click on that new arrivals button, then you can see them. But you got to move fast because the thing about John G is they create these designs, they put them out there, and then they don't replenish them necessarily. So you have the opportunity to look cool and unique and not just like everybody else, but you got to act fast, you got to jump on these things quickly. So I would encourage you to go check out their site now for those new arrivals. All the other same things apply that I've talked about before, beautiful colors, designs, really functional stuff. And 2% of all revenues go to support water projects all around the world. So you get good gear, you also help a great cause or great causes. So go to runjohnji.com, use my code rogue, R-O-G-U-E, for 10% off. Your first order or your fifth order, go check it out. Again, runjohnji.com, code rogue for 10% off, R-O-G-U-E. Go check it out. Okay, 2 more things I'm going to talk about here. Number 4, if you want to have your best race in the fall, you're going to do this thing, which I talk about a lot on this podcast, but for whatever reason, people still don't believe me or still can't let it really seek in or their ego won't let them or they have trouble embracing it all the way or they think maybe different rules apply to them. Not sure why. This one's hard to accept, but you have to polarize your pace. Really slow down, particularly on those easy runs and recovery runs so that you can go faster not only on your workouts, but also on race day. I want you to embrace this principle and really, really try it out this time. Really, really try it out this time. You need a reminder about why this is important, why it leads to getting your most potential. Then you can go listen to episode 306, which really where I really break down all the reasons why it's important to slow down in order to get faster. This is a practice that I've lived by myself for a long time that I coach, that I see people do in my programming and then therefore have outsized results and benefits. It is critical to achieving your most potential. Go listen to episode 306 if you haven't embraced the why behind going slow. But you really want to polarize your pace, which means that your days are looking different. Not everything is just running together and looking the same. To use the rules of thumb that I've shared on this podcast before, you want your easy runs, which would be your medium long run and your long runs, to be one to two minutes per mile slower than marathon pace, or 90 seconds to two and a half minutes slower than half marathon pace. If you're not going that slow or slower, then you're probably going too fast on your easy runs. For recovery runs, I really want you to, especially with these, push the envelope. Usually I say two minutes slower than or slower than marathon pace or two and a half minutes or slower than half marathon pace for recovery, but I want you to push the envelope for this season. I want you to go to three to four minutes slower than marathon pace or three and a half to four and a half minutes slower than half marathon pace. And if that means you're settling in at a brisk walk, I'm okay with that. That's movement. That creates blood flow. That promotes healing and does it in a way that doesn't tax the musculoskeletal system so that you can then go get the most out of your hard days and your long days. That's okay if that's where you end up. But really push the envelope here. Your medium, long, and your long run should have a certain pace range. And by the way, that might vary from day to day depending on how you feel, depending on the weather. If it gets hot in the summer, you're going to slow down even more in order to stay in the right effort zone. And recovery days are even slower. And of course, on your quality days, it's going to be about putting the most into those and certainly going faster, but not faster than what might be prescribed. So polarize your pacing. Go slow when you're supposed to go slow so that you can go faster when you're supposed to go fast. Absolutely critical. But I see people all the time making mistakes here. Cheating it, thinking, Oh, I can just cheat it a little bit. It's fine. Start out a minute slower than marathon pace. Maybe finish 30 seconds faster. Well, what happens when you do that? Two things happen. One is that you end up stressing the body in a way that might risk injury. So you stress the musculoskeletal and the neuromuscular system in a way that's going to get you hurt, which then compromises your ability to stay consistent, which, by the way, as I said earlier, is the number one thing that's going to help you improve. So you risk injury, and you risk injury for not only no incremental benefit but also potentially a negative benefit because you then thrust yourself into an aerobic zone that might actually take you out of an aerobic capacity building zone so that you're not even getting the aerobic benefit that you might need on that day. So going faster not only compromises your ability to stay healthy but also puts you in a place where you're wasting miles. You're not getting the benefit of the work. So don't let those runs creep on you. Another pitfall I see here is people comparing easy runs by pace from one to another as if it matters. As if because you did one long run of similar distance faster than the other, then that means the faster long run is better. No, not necessarily. There's a huge range at which we build aerobic capacity. I want you hanging out in the middle of the easy range. And that might mean if one run is 10 seconds faster than another per mile, doesn't mean it's better. Could mean it's worse if you end up too fast. But it might just be, hey, that was the day ahead. Sometimes you feel better than others. Sometimes it's smoother than others. So sometimes in order to maintain the right effort, you end up running a little faster. Maybe the weather's cooler. Maybe you had the wind at your back. Maybe you had fewer hills, whatever it may be. Don't make a big deal about comparing your pace from one run to the next. What that does is it leads you to dangerous habits of the creeping that I just talked about earlier. So don't compare the runs. If you got done with the run at the right effort, you passed. This is pass, fail. Did the volume at the right effort, pass. Doesn't matter how it compares from a pace perspective. In fact, I would celebrate a run that's slower than another run because it means it was even easier on you. And maybe you also got more time in your feet. Therefore, you spent more time out there. Therefore, you spent more time aerobic capacity building. Therefore, it was a better run because you went slower, perhaps. So celebrate those. Or maybe it was less debilitating and you felt even better afterwards because you went slower. That's another reason why a slower run might be better. So to resist that temptation to compare runs and to think that a run that was a little bit faster, if it was an easy run, is better, that leads to destructive, dangerous behavior that isn't helpful. Another pitfall I see people making is not adjusting for weather or heat. It's about to get hot in many places. It's already really hot and humid here in Austin. Heat affects our ability to process things aerobically. Therefore, we should be going slower when it's hotter in order to maintain a constant effort. And that doesn't mean that that slower run in hot weather is better or worse than that faster run in cool weather. If they're both done at the same effort or the right effort, then they're both equally the same. But you have to expect that hotter, humid weather is going to slow you down, and you have to embrace that and not let it get you to think that it's worse or get in your head or affect your ego and have you questioning whether or not any of your goals are possible because you're making the appropriate adjustments for weather. I've talked about this before, but if we were to go to altitude, and you were running at 9,000 or 10,000 feet, and you were huffing and puffing, and therefore you slowed down in order to keep the effort manageable because you're at altitude, you would do that, and you would say afterwards, Yeah, of course I was slower because I was at 10,000 feet, and there was no oxygen in the air for me to breathe. So yes, I slowed down to make the effort right. And we would do that, and we would just make the adjustment and not even question it or not even have an ego issue associated with that need to slow down at altitude. But for whatever reason, when it's 75 degrees here and 90% humidity in the morning, we don't give ourselves that same grace. We think that we should be running the exact same pace, or we try to run the exact same pace. And that puts us into an effort zone that's just too fast. So you got to embrace the heat, the summer, slow it down. Effort is king. That's what matters most in terms of getting the physiological benefits. And you have to do it slow. If you have to do it slower because of the weather, then so be it. That's what you should do in order to get the right benefit. So don't force it. If it's hot, it's not productive. So that's plenty of pitfalls there, but I can't emphasize enough. You got to polarize your paces, and I want to encourage everyone who's listening to push the envelope in the slow direction this cycle and just see what it unlocks. It will change your world, I promise. Okay, number five things to think about for fall is thinking about how you can incrementally build volume. Typically, I recommend not increasing peak volume from one cycle to the next by more than about 20%. So if you were doing 30 miles per week in this cycle, you could build up to maybe 36 per week in the next cycle. Or if you were doing 20, you can build to 24, 25. If you're doing 40, you can build to 48 to 50. Incrementally increase volume doesn't mean it has to be a 20% gain, but that would be the upper limit that I would consider. And then the question becomes, where can I incrementally increase volume that's going to give me the most bang for my buck? And I would submit that there's two primary places for you to consider that first. That would be on your long run and your medium long run. Those are the two days, those longer days, because you're getting outsized benefit, aerobic benefit for the later miles of a longer run than you are from the early miles. So when we get out there for 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20, 22 miles, the later miles of those runs give us more aerobic capacity building benefit than the early miles. So if you're adding miles to those runs, that's where you get the most bang for your buck in incremental volume. So add a couple miles to your medium long run in this cycle versus last. Get to a higher long run than you have in this cycle versus last. So if you're a half marathoner, and you've never done 14 or 16 mile long runs in preparation for a half, perhaps consider building to that peak instead of 12 or fewer. If you're a marathoner and you've never done 20 mile runs, maybe you've only built 18 or 16, consider getting to 20 miles this time and see what happens. And then beyond that, try to, if you can, and do it safely, build two more of those runs than maybe you have in the past. Maybe you've already done 20 before in a previous marathon cycle, but you can get to doing four or five of them in this cycle versus two or three. Or maybe you've already done 14 miles for a half, but you did it once or twice, but you could get to doing it three or four or five times leading up to this next half. Those opportunities to multiply those longer long runs also gives you that same type of benefit. So if you're going to add volume, prioritize those longer runs first, then the next priority would be adding volume to your quality day, and then the last priority would be adding to your recovery day. By the way, this assumes we're already at five or six days per week. If you're not at that already, then first step would be adding days before you add distance to those days. So consider where you can incrementally add volume. And by the way, I had a great question in one of my workshops. Somebody asked, if I only have 45 minutes and I need to get a run in, should I go faster to get more miles, or should I keep the pace slow and get whatever miles I get in that time? And the answer is clear, 100% unequivocal. Do not compromise the effort in order to do more volume, because time on your feet is time on your feet. So if you only have 45 minutes, run the pace you're supposed to run in order to get the effort you're supposed to get, and let the miles be what they are. Don't force the pace just to get more miles. That's counterproductive. And maybe there are days where you can't get volume. It's not about that. You just say, I'm going to do 45 minutes or 60 minutes or 75 or 90, and you get whatever miles you get in that window running the right effort. That's the priority versus forcing the pace and getting more volume. So that's one of the pitfalls I see people make, is they get more volume by running too fast. So don't do that. Another pitfall that I see people make is adding volume to the wrong days. They add to the recovery days first instead of to the medium, long run or long run. And again, those recovery days, it's about movement and blood flow and healing. You can typically get that done in 3 to 5 miles for most people or 60 minutes max for most people. So adding incremental volume there typically isn't giving you the same bang for the buck as adding it on those long days, medium, long run or long run. So prioritize where you're adding volume, which should allow you to be more strategic about where you're adding volume so you don't necessarily have to add a ton of overall volume while still getting that outsized benefit. Relatedly, another pitfall I see people make is focusing too much on the total volume number. While it ultimately is important, and you want to stack that together as consistently as you can, I also think that how those days are constructed sometimes matters more than that total volume number. So don't go forcing volume. If you haven't properly set out your days, if you don't have that routine established with a clear medium long run and a clear long run and a clear quality and clear recovery days, if you don't have a polarization of your volume as well based on the purposes of those days, and you're just going and cranking out miles, you might still get a benefit, but will it be an optimized benefit? I don't think so. So yeah, sure, it's about total volume. The more total volume you can run, typically the faster you can be within your ability to recover from that volume. But equally at least, maybe more importantly, is how those miles fit together matters too. So don't just throw volume at the wall and do it blindly. Make sure it makes sense. Make sure it fits together according to the routine that I talked about earlier. And then the last pitfall, the other side of that coin is that you can only do as much volume as you can recover from. So if you're forcing volume, but you're not getting the sleep you need as a result, or you've got a lot of stress at work that's not allowing you to recover in the ways that you need to, or you're not going slow enough, you're not polarizing your pace enough to allow you to do that volume, then it's not going to work. Just throwing volume at a wall without properly fitting that volume together and without having the space in your life to do it, it's not going to work. You can only do as much as you can recover from, so you have to make sure it's balanced. And yes, incrementally, if you can increase volume and still recover from that volume, you will get benefit. But if you get beyond that point of being able to recover, then you need some help to create more balance. It's going to be counterproductive at that point, and you need to figure out how to prioritize so that you can fit it in and fit it together in a way that allows you to do it sustainably. If you can't do it sustainably, then it's not going to work. Now, oftentimes, when people run into this challenge, then we can actually make relatively small tweaks to work through it in order to still maintain a reasonable volume level. But sometimes it's more challenging than others, and it depends on your individual case. But don't forget, you can only do as much as you can recover from. So make sure you're keeping that lens, especially as you go, especially as you enter new volume thresholds. Certainly, you're going to feel like you're run down for a bit as you adjust to new levels, but that should dissipate. You should adapt to it. But if you're not adapting, that's when you raise a red flag and make adjustments. So those are the five things to be thinking about and the pitfalls to avoid as you prep for your fall races. One, have a sharp and clear vision and picture for your purpose. Two, focus on one single peak. That's critical to getting the highest peak that you can. Three, be consistent with a routine that has all the components you need to have success. Four, polarize your paces and really, really embrace those slow and easy paces for this training cycle. Number five, strategically and incrementally find ways to increase your volume so that you can get the most aerobic capacity to have that highest peak in the fall. Those are the five things to consider as you take steps towards your fall races in September, October, November, and beyond. Hopefully, this is helpful. Hopefully, this crystallizes a picture of what you can prioritize and focus on as you look to get to that next step forward. Thanks to all of you for listening. Thanks to my sponsor, John G. As always, you can check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Twitter, Instagram, or Facebook at Rogue Running. Until next time, talk to you soon.