Hey, everybody, it is episode 114 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is Chris coming at you from Austin, Texas. I will have a special guest with me today, a woman by the name of Marilyn Faulkner, who is a longtime runner and coach here at Rogue Running. She actually coaches all levels of runners, but her particular specialty in our world is coaching that beginner runner, that person who's starting, or maybe restarting after some time away. And I think she does a particularly good job of relating to that level of athlete and helping them take those first steps and build to wherever they might want to go with it. So with this episode, we're gonna pretty much jump straight into my discussion with Marilyn and talk about beginner running. I did want to episode, I did want to reference episode 55, another episode that Steve and I did on this topic, which I think covers some of these elements. So there's some overlap, but more, but we'll go into a little bit more depth today about what it takes to get started if you're a beginner. And I think this is relevant for not only those that are new to running, but also those who might need to get back into running, or who may just think running sucks and want to figure out a way to make it not suck for them. So hopefully you enjoy this episode or can at least share it with some friends that might need to hear it if they need that little nudge to get started. And so we'll bring Marilyn on in just a second. By way of intro, I did also want to quickly mention that the US. Indoor Champs are happening this weekend. If you're listening to this as I post it on a Sunday or a Monday, then the US. Champs will have happened this past weekend. So I would encourage you to go check it out. Go watch the replays on NBC Sports Gold or NBC Sports. And be a fan. I'll be talking a little bit more about the results from US. Indoors once I actually see them myself on our next episode. So with that quick intro, we're gonna jump straight in and talk about beginner running. Welcome, Marilyn, to the show. Good to have you. Marilyn, as I mentioned in our intro, has been a coach for us for a very long time and is one of our coaches for our Couch to 5K program here at Rogue to help those that might be new or returning to running get started. And so that's what we're gonna talk about today before we jump in with a little more intro on you, Marilyn. I did wanna emphasize that this episode is not just for beginners.

That's true.

And we were just talking offline about how this is really also for anybody who might be more experienced, so that hopefully they can either relate and help their friends who might wanna get into running or potentially just share this with them so that they have the information they need to start.

That's right. And not only that, but perhaps something in here that they haven't thought about or can rewind a little bit on their own training and work in some of these new principles or lines of thought.

Yes, first principles. Sometimes it's good to have those reminders. So before we jump in, and we're just gonna cover, as we again kinda talked about a lot, sort of the who, what, when, why, how of starting running, talking about some general principles for a new runner. And we've covered this a little bit before in episode 55, which was about a year ago. But I would say we didn't really do it justice. And we didn't have an expert like you on who really works with these athletes all the time. And so before we jump into that, though, give us a little background on you as a runner and now as a coach.

Sure. Well, I've been with Rogue for eight years as a coach and a few more as an athlete. So that's, you know, a decade's worth of running. And the majority of that doing coaching. So I've learned a lot, not only from the coaching staff here, but also from all these runners that I've coached. And that varies in level from when I started with Rogue, I was coaching beginning triathlon training for women and moved all the way through full marathon training and everything in between. The only thing I think I haven't coached here at this point would be the trail program, but I did participate in that for many years. So it's been nice to have this well-rounded running experience. And in that 10-year time frame, I've had two children and one's on the way. So I've also run through all my pregnancies. So I have that voice as well and currently help train and prepare background and education for women that are either pre-pregnancy or trying to continue their fitness journey through running or other mediums while pregnant. So I've been really privileged to see a lot of different athletes through a lot of different phases in life. So that's what I'm doing now. And currently, like you said, I do coach the Couch to 5K, 10K program here at Rogue on an evening and just wrapped today full half training for the Austin 3M Houston training.

Yeah, you're doing both right now for us.

Yeah.

Which is awesome. I think one of your skill sets that translates well for all levels of athletes is your ability to explain the basics and help people understand the whys of what we're doing, which is definitely a strength of yours. Can I also quickly give a shout out to you for, you've had two kids so far, one another on the way, both you had without payments.

That's true.

Completely free of epidurals. And I remember talking to you about that where you were thinking about the gels you would take and you treated it like an endurance event, having a baby without pain meds. And that's incredibly badass. But also really, really cool. So hopefully you don't feel too embarrassed by me outing you there, but that's insane. That's insane. I mean, it's awesome that you would make that decision. And of course, everybody has to make their own personal decision on that front. But it was just cool to me how you equated what you learned from marathon running yourself to taking that to a marathon labor situation.

Well, it really is. It's the definition is the ultimate endurance event. I've always said that about birth. So yeah, I had to look at it in that way. And I was really thankful that I had my training behind me to help me get through that ultimate endurance event. And I got one more coming up in three months. So here we go, I'll get my gels ready again.

Yes, so amazing. There's probably an entire episode on that at some point.

Right, we could talk about that.

But let's jump in. And I want to start with a little bit of a preamble before we kind of get to the questions that we teed up. I wrote or was interviewed recently for a article that will come out soon in the Statesman about training for the CAP 10K, which is a big capital 10, 000, which is a big race here in April in Austin. And the woman writing the article just shared the draft of it with me that will go out in the paper. And one of the quotes she pulled from our discussion was this idea that I talked about how a lot of people say, I can't run or I'm not a runner. And I talked about how that that's just a story that people tell themselves. And certainly there are those that for whatever reason, aren't physically able to run. And that's not who I'm talking about. I'm talking about those that are able to walk, are able to move, can run for any distance right now, even if it's only 10 yards. For those that are physically able, I truly believe that everybody can be a runner if they're willing to take that first step and get support in building their ability to do it. And that's everybody. You know, Bill Bowerman, one of the co-founders of Nike, he used to say, if you have a body, you're an athlete. And my corollary to that would be, if you have a body, you're a runner. But a lot of people are afraid to own that or have been told they're not or can't or they've tried and they haven't been able to. And so I want to start there with, what's your message to those who might be listening or who might have friends that they know about who sit into that category, for those people that say, I'm not a runner?

Well, that is a great question to ask because that was where my mind kind of started when I started thinking about how to frame this episode. Because, you know, when I'm going around or just chatting with people, asking what I do, and when it comes up as an element of myself that I'm a running coach, we're talking about Rogue, a lot of times the first thing I hear is, oh, I'm not a runner because, or I have this past injury and then a story, you know? And it's funny to me that that's kind of people's like knee-jerk reaction to just automatically almost admit or say to me, I'm not this. And in my mind, I'm thinking, well, but you are, you know? And I know that because I see it all the time here at Rogue. It's that fear of not knowing how to approach this that sits in your way. So what I say to a lot of runners, just about all my groups, when they start or encounter that comment like we're talking about, I ask people to just visualize everything that's in front of them, like right in front of their face, like a pile. And I ask them to put their hand out in front of them, like right in front of their body, and just move it to the side, move it out of the way, just dismiss it because you have that ability to make that choice to just let it go. There are a million things we can say or build up in our mind about who we are or aren't, but what's important is what you do, right? The method that you're gonna commit to in your mind and body to get started with something. And so the big part of that, first part of that journey is moving aside all that mental blockage and just go done, dismissed, it's gone, and then move forward with a clean slate. And I know that's easy to say, but really if you can just, you know, the whatever, the gal that's all over the news, Marie Kondo, is that her name? Or Spark Joy? Or, you know, she's like the cleaning gal that like helps you clear everything out of your house. She's the thing now on Netflix. Anyway, her thing is to clear out clutter and just keep things at Spark Joy, right? Like that's her deal. So I just thought, you know, that's also really applicable to running. You just have to move it all away and just be like, we just have to start somewhere.

So let's break that down for a second because I know a lot of people when I say that will look at me and they'll be like, well, it's easy for you to say. You're a runner or you're an athlete or you have some natural ability or maybe, you know, they'll, you know, whatever. You're built like a runner. They'll say something like that. Or for you, you know, it's might be the same thing. You're doing it. Of course, it's easy for you to say that. So how would you dispel those things? It's like, well, because you might have those that maybe they think, well, I have to lose weight first, or I have bad knees, or I tried it before and I couldn't do it. You know, I deal with injuries too much. So how do you dispel some of those myths that exist in people's minds, which are real, and which honestly not all of them I can personally relate to, because I've more or less been active in running in some way, either through sport or through running itself my entire life. And so I don't know what that feels like to come from an inactive place to try to start a routine of activity.

Well, I think that my first reaction is to explain some of the things that I've seen happen through our couch program or just beginning athletes in general in the other population I work with, of pregnant women, that it is possible to do what you think is not possible if you are consistent and if you have a good plan. So if you can find a community that helps you do that, if you don't want to do it on your own, or if you choose to do it on your own by simply making the decision to move through space and time in a positive way, then you can do it. And I think that having a community like we have here at Rogue, or that you can find in your own community, or that you can find online through a virtual community like through Strava or MyFitnessPal, or even just a running buddy, or even just telling someone, hey, I want to do this and I'm gonna do it, and I want you to know that I'm gonna do it so that you can help hold me accountable is key. I think just when we exist fully within ourself, it's easy to just dismiss the idea of getting started or to have some excuse be king. Well, guess what? You're the king or queen. So you're in charge. And so you can make that decision to say, I'm not gonna let that limitation or that thought be in charge of me, but you have to make that conscious decision to do that. So I guess that is part of it. But when I see our runners step into this door that have never run, that are perhaps overweight, that are coming back from an injury, that have a million things to do in their job and they're slammed, yet they still choose to walk inside, I think when they experience the community and they experience that they're not gonna be alone, is really helpful. And makes it seem possible all of a sudden. And of course, then we also have our awesome training plans which work. So that's helpful as well. That's an empowering tool. But if you don't have those things that you're access, what I would say is, make the decision to be in charge, to be the one that's gonna move yourself forward, and step out of your door. I mean, running is the sport that has the lowest barrier to entry of all. All you have to do is have some shoes and walk outside.

Yes, yes, yes, yes. And we've seen it. All backgrounds have walked in. The hardest that we like to say is that first one through the door because it is intimidating. We've seen all shapes, sizes, backgrounds, ages.

Yes.

Step in here for the first time and start just by taking that first step. And that would include every story you can imagine from somebody who was over 400 pounds at one point starting our programming and then would eventually lose 100 pounds working through our program and then eventually doing a marathon. We've seen it all. We've seen every single scenario you can imagine. And the one commonality, as you say, is that they all just made a decision to do it differently.

They did, and they also became a part of the community, which is, I think, such a strong and wonderful motivator.

You can't do it alone.

You can, but it's more fun to do it with others. Fair enough. Because some people are individuals and don't want... A part of what I was thinking through when I was outlining this episode was, and for me too, that a part of running for me sometimes, a lot of the times, is being alone, yet not alone. You know, it's like I'm alone when I'm running and I'm just on the trail or in my neighborhood or whatever by myself, and that's beautiful. But I'm not really alone, because I'm out in the world. I'm outside, I'm outdoors, I'm free from distraction. You know, I'm not, I don't have a device. You know, well, besides my garment, which I need. Not always, but I do like that.

Can't let go of that.

But what I love about it is that you can be in a community, yet individual. So like when you're out on the trail, Town Light Trail, for example, here in Austin, we have this, I'm sure you've talked about it before, but this wonderful 10-mile trail-ish, it's 10-mile-ish, loop that goes all around our city, and you can go out for a run, and you're by yourself, but you're in the community. So I think that even if you don't have an established training group like we have at Rogue, you can still have that community feel, even in a gym setting, going out and getting into your gym and getting on a treadmill, you're still with others. So that's the difference, I think between feeling isolated and feeling limited in that way, and just being with others, I think is helpful for me personally. But yeah, it's a part of the choice you make, again, is how do you want to frame your journey? How do you want to frame that?

There are also, I think, some myths out there about running. I do a talk sometimes with companies that want me to come in, and sometimes I start with this idea that running doesn't have to suck. Most people who don't run think running sucks, or that it's too painful or they get injured or they can't do it. There's a lot of negative association with it. And my hook with the talk is basically, it doesn't have to be that way if you do it the right way. And so that's another point, I think, you know, people come to me like, well, I can't do it my knees, my bad knees, whatever it may be. Well, science would tell us that movement, that load, is actually better for your joints and your bones and your tendons, ligaments, muscles, then no load. Not moving is worse for you. Inactivity is worse for you than activity. You aren't hurting your knees with the, quote unquote, pounding of running. What you're doing is actually making your body stronger through that movement. Now, obviously, you have to do it the right way. We'll talk more about what the right way looks like later. But this idea that you can't do it because you're going to break is just wrong.

I completely agree with that, and building structural strength can be a challenge in the beginning. And I encounter that for the first four weeks of any program with an inexperienced runner, that there is going to be some twinging and aching involved. There will not is, but it's likely that something is going to be uncomfortable in the beginning. Because it's a new stimulus on your body that hasn't been present before. But I always like to remind people, my beginners, that running at its very basic definition is of course just moving through space and time, moving forward. But on a deeper level, you have to think about running as actually moving both your body and your mind and even your spirit forward in a positive way. And as long as you're making that positive forward progression in all three areas, then you're doing it right. You know, there's not one right or wrong way to get started or to, for your journey to unfold, right? It's just go forward in all ways. Don't get upset if you're going forward physically, but mentally you're having a block or it's just a tough run, or you went up a hill and your Achilles was hurting you or you know, whatever. You just have to say, okay, so I'm moving forward physically positively when my mind isn't going there. So how do I make that adjustment for my mind to get with my body? And it can be the other way too. So if you're just committed to positive forward movement, then you're gonna be more likely to have success and committing to that it's not always gonna be easy and there are gonna be times where it doesn't all click. But knowing that if you're making that effort to move forward in that way, then that's gonna be a key for your beginning success.

Yeah. So the who is everybody. Everybody who can stand on two feet. And the what you're getting to, which is that, and I think people get hung up over, well, who's a runner? And not sort of like once we get to the second question, I can run a question of, okay, everybody can be a runner. But what is running? Does it have to look a certain way to be considered running or for somebody who's trying to move forward through space to be considered a runner? And there's a lot of hangups about that. I mean, if you get in the, this is one thing I hate about some corners of our sport who would say, well, you're not a real runner unless you're doing X, Y, Z, unless you're training for races, unless you're running a certain speed, unless you're not walking, you know, at all. There are corners of our sport that get hung up with that definition of what is running and what is the activity that would cause somebody to be considered a runner once they've started. And that's the bullshit part, you know, that I think causes people to get hung up. Because as you said, it's just about moving forward. And that can look a lot of different ways, right?

Yes.

Especially early on.

Yeah, it's definitely something that we hope that people will buy into in the beginning, that when you show up, when you get here, you're a runner, you are here, you came. You know, or if you're not here in Austin, Texas, you know, you walk outside, you have your shoes on, and you take those first steps. I mean, I would say to those critics or people in the industry that are making those statements, I would say to them, you need to turn that around on yourself and look in the mirror, you're not a runner. You're not being aware that there are all types of runners and anyone that's making the attempt to do something good for their body and journey is doing a great job and the right thing, you know, is moving in that running direction, right? So yeah, there isn't one true definition of a runner because there's not one true definition of a human being or one human being's journey or one human being's way of moving forward, one human being's goals, right? We're all different. So if it's gonna look different for everyone, there's gonna be a different definition of runner for everyone. And what you have to do as a beginner is define like what does that mean to me? Does it mean leaving my work five minutes early so I can beat the traffic a little bit to get home at a better time, more light to just get out the door and do a run? Or does it mean that you're gonna, you know, if you're a more advanced runner to completely commit to that training schedule, that is challenging. Is that what it means for you, you know, this training cycle or whatever? And I also like as far as physical, you know, I'm a runner, I'm not a runner. One thing I love about what we teach here at Rogue is that there isn't one physical way to be, right? We've kind of touched on that said. There's not one right form. There's not one right look. There's not one right speed. Everyone is gonna look different because we're all built differently. And we all have different limitations and goals and realities that may be more limiting or provide an opportunity. And so just unlocking, I think what that means for you individually is part of what I think is so beautiful about running is that it can be all about you at times. Even though you exist in this beautiful community, it's all about what does it mean for me and what I wanna do, how would I wanna accomplish? And so if you can define that, even on a small level, even just a sentence, what is one little thing I wanna accomplish? Do this trial period of getting to be a runner. If you can define that, then it's helpful and it can help move you forward.

Yeah, and I have a very broad definition of what is the activity of running. When people first show up here that first day, it can be 20 minutes of walking. I don't actually care how you move through space, you know? And for some people, what might be considered walking is sort of running for somebody else. At least it feels like it's that kind of tempo. So when people delineate between, well, and I was walking, not running, when people make that delineation, I don't really care. And I guess if you looked it up in Webster's, maybe there's some way to define the distinction. But to me, it doesn't really matter. And sometimes I'll have people tell me, well, I was so proud, I ran the whole way. I didn't walk at all. And I can appreciate the fact that somebody would have a framework for themselves that that would be a goal. But as a coach, I could care less. I could care less the form that you took in one part of the race versus the form that you took in another part of the race to get to a finish line. If getting to the finish line was a goal, it doesn't really matter to me how you got there. And so I always find it interesting when people make that distinction because really, as you said earlier, it's just about moving through space, however that manifests for you. And by some Webster definition, you might be, quote unquote, walking at subsegments and or, quote unquote, jogging or running and others. But who really cares? Like it's just about moving forward and then letting the evolution of that movement play out as you become a more trained athlete.

And as you become stronger, you know, as you continue to walk and to turning into running, interval training is something that we do here. We try and have you measure sort of where you're at, comfortably walking, and when you're ready to run, start running. When you wanna stop, then stop and start walking until you recover and then start running again. And all of that walking is gonna, if you have the goal in your mind to improve, which most people do when they come to us, is gonna translate into running. It will translate that way. But again, if you don't take those first steps as a walker here with us, then you're not gonna get to that next step of running, so absolutely, being realistic with where you are is also important because we find, with beginners, injuries occur when you push on too hard, too fast, too soon. So we recommend doing what's comfortable for you in your current state, in your current body, which we wanna honor, because you're here, and that's what got you here, and you're able to move. But when you're ready to start tracking that interval, start tracking it. And then when you're ready to reduce that walk time, then you start reducing it. You do that over a set time, a planned journey, you know, however you define it. We have a month-long training program here at Rogue that we hope to reduce walk intervals over that set month. And so when you allow yourself to just have cognition around that, then there is room for improvement, right? You give yourself a path for success. But you're absolutely right in that just getting started and moving is the goal. And I've never seen it to where someone never in my, you know, however many years of coaching, eight years of coaching, I've never seen anyone just remain a walker. All of our athletes end up saying, hey, okay, I'm getting stronger. This feels good. I feel I have more confidence. I know what I'm doing now, so I'm going to start running. And it happens quickly. But we don't want it to happen too fast, right? We want you to follow the set plan that we have and for you to follow your intervals and when you feel ready to start running. And sure enough, it is successful.

Yeah, be patient.

Patience is key.

Just think about moving through space. So who is anybody? The what is moving forward. Doesn't really matter what that looks like. And so what about the when? How should people think about when to get started? Or if there should be parameters around that?

Well, I'll start just with the bottom line of my message on the when. And that is making sure that you, whatever, whenever it is that you decide to run, that you make the time for it and make it a priority. That's gonna be the key to success. So we can start off by talking about that. So there's never going to be a time where you don't have other commitments, you don't have other things to do with your job, family, et cetera. You just have to prioritize when you've decided to run on certain days and commit to it and say nothing is gonna stop that. When it doesn't work is when it's the other way around. When you say, gosh, I've got to do this, I've got to go to the store, I have to do this deadline, I have to take this kid here, I have to be at work at this hour, so then I can't blah, blah, blah, blah. Instead, you just have to say, you know what, no matter what, with some flexibility, I'm gonna make it on these two days, say just starting with two days or even one day, this is my time to run and nothing's gonna interrupt it. And when you allow for that to happen, the rest is gonna follow, the rest of your success is gonna start falling into place. It's not like you're just gonna, oh, I made the decision to run one day and now I'm perfect, everything's great. It takes a lot of adjustment within your life, but that's the beauty of getting started with running, is that when you start it and when you see the rewards that it's going to bring to you, better sleep, more patience, better health, time outside, weight loss, gaining muscle, feeling better, endorphins, all those things that come from running, you're going to go, oh, okay, this is a good thing. I'm liking this. And then in turn, that will reinforce your commitment to having started. So...

Create a routine.

Yes, creating a routine.

Think about your routine.

So doing that, I also like to say, if you have a training schedule, if you're with an organization that has that, try to stick to it as best you can within allowing running to become a part of life, again, with flexibility. But there's other things other than just like, I do it on Tuesday, I run on Tuesday at 6 o'clock, every Tuesday. There's more to that. Well, run when you need to be alone. Run when you need a break, like we were talking about earlier. Run when you want to be in that community, but not in that community. Or one thing that I've heard you say time and time again, which I love, which is a part of your coaching strategy, is when your goal is big enough to scare you to do it, you know, to motivate you to want to do it. So if you've got a goal, if you have a race, something you're aiming for, you know what, if you don't commit to what you're doing, you may not reach that goal. So it's good to set a goal to kind of make you get out.

Pick a timeline, right? Give yourself a deadline of sorts.

Exactly.

Put it far enough out that it doesn't feel too scary, but close enough also that you have to do the work to get there. You know, if you're gonna think about doing a first 5K, I think a three month window, you know.

Sure.

Pick a race three months out, and then commit to a routine. It could be a program that you sign up for. It could be an app that you follow to get to that race so that you have a deadline, something to hold you accountable to getting there.

And another thing I always like to stress with my runners on the win is consistency is what's most important with starting running. I think at any level of running, consistency brings results, period. So even if on your schedule or in your mind, whatever you've created, if you said, gosh, I'm gonna go out and run for two miles a day, and that was your goal. Well, if life throws you a curve ball and you don't have that time, just get out there for 20 minutes. 20 minutes can bring, especially when you're beginning, can bring a fitness gain. So that consistent, not stress, but building on your ligaments, muscles and tendons, that 20 minute interval on a consistent basis can really bring you something. So don't dismiss the day or the goal or the time you're gonna go out to run. If you're, huh, nevermind, I can't do those full two miles, so I don't have time, I'm just not gonna do it. Please don't do that. Instead, just get out and run 20 minutes. And typically, if you're out there for 20, it's gonna turn into longer, you know, because you get that start, you got that warm up, you're out there already, you've got all your gear on. You might as well go ahead and go longer.

Something is always better than nothing, I like to say. If you have two miles on the plan, can't do two, do one. If you have 30 minutes, can't do 30, do 20. Something is always better than nothing. And as you say, sometimes you end up getting out there and you go longer and it all works out, but sometimes it doesn't. And sometimes it's just about squeezing in what you can, and that is always dramatically better than nothing because it, one, gives you some load, and two, it also keeps you in that routine.

That's exactly right. I agree.

So, the one thing I want, so I wanted to talk about here just that idea of, what are some examples of ways to fit this in so that it doesn't become cumbersome, you know? What are creative ways to build this kind of thing into your routine? And that's where I think sometimes we, as humans generally when we have goals, struggle because we think, well, I have to carve out this dedicated time from an already busy schedule. And in my world with more experienced runners, oftentimes it manifests in the idea of, where am I gonna do strength training when I don't have time to do an extra class for that or pay for an extra gym access or whatever it may be? And one lesson I got from John Shrupp, who's been a coach here, is that, hey, those types of things can be done anywhere at any time. And so it might be doing calf raises while you're standing in the line at the grocery store. It might be doing lunges around the playroom while you're watching your kids play at night before bedtime. It's actually easy if you're creative to build in activity to your life. It could mean if you have to make a call for business or pleasure, you need to talk to your mom, that you go out and you walk 20 minutes while you're on the phone with your mom, if that's your starting place for movement. So you can multitask potentially. And so I would encourage people to also be creative about where things can fit, because I think sometimes we get too siloed when this is my time for running, this is my time for acts. It's like, no, you can sometimes merge those things and fit it in.

That's so true. And it's just the way that our lifestyles are evolving towards, right? Like we are creatures of multitask. I mean, that's just the way that with social media, with all of the information outlets that we have, the way the business now is, we're all asked to do many things at once. So it's okay to let that bleed over into your running. And again, just not using the, I've got this X task that I'm supposed to be doing right now as the excuse and instead as the opportunity, which is exactly what you're describing. You know, when you're out, just out and about, right? Like with your children, if you have children, you know, do a run in the stroller instead of taking them for a walk in the stroller. Or if you're a professional, you know, just get to work 20 to 30 minutes earlier when no one's there anyway. Do, you know, run around your building when you're traveling. Like get on the treadmill at the hotel gym. You know, you're not going to miss those 20 minutes that you were 30 minutes that you would have, you know, been watching whatever, friends on Facebook. Doing your scrolling your feed. I mean, you know, and you know what? Guess what? On a treadmill, you can still do those things. Yeah, do those things. So yeah, you're exactly right. I mean, it's just all about finding those little places where you can fit that stuff in to make it more consistent, right?

I think it's also helpful to, and you know, potential for some of your routine is to find a friend that you can meet.

Yes.

For that accountability. It's like, hey, we're gonna meet every Tuesday at 6 a.m. and we're gonna do 20 minutes, whatever it is together. That way you have the accountability built in of somebody who's on the journey with you, but also somebody who's gonna text you when you're not there and hold you accountable to that time.

It makes it so much more fun, for sure, to be with someone. Even if you don't have that person to start, I mean, gosh, we're all connected on these devices. You can share your journey as well there. Say, gosh, today I did it. You wanna do it every time probably, but it's okay to be proud of the fact that you're starting to run and that you wanna share that success with others. And so if you wanna do a little selfie of your beautiful sunrise pic on your 5.30 a.m. run, guess what I did this morning instead of dreaming. You know, here we are. We get to have this beautiful photo and be proud, and it's fun to share. So even if you don't have a friend that's committing to the journey with you, you've got friends that are in support of you and you being the best person you can be. And if that's the choice that you wanna make, to have movement be a part of that journey, then people are gonna be cheering you on in all ways that's gonna help you commit and to what you've decided to do and to be excited about it with you.

The consistency that you mentioned is key, though. As you said, it's the number one metric for improvement in this sport, regardless of whether you're new or whether you're a veteran. Doing it, any of it, weekend and week out, month in, month out, ultimately year in, year out, is gonna make you better over the long haul. And if you can't establish that consistency, then it's gonna be tough.

It is, and I think it's a good lesson when you aren't able to be consistent. Because you really do see the difference between a runner that was consistent and that wasn't. And it's also a good opportunity for us as coaches to have conversations with people that weren't able to be consistent for whatever reason, whether it was by their own choice or not. To face that, you know, and understand that that is a part of the success in this sport, like you said. And so then, if it was something, if there were things that were in your control, which I think a lot of time it is, you know, we do have a lot of things that are in our control. As far as these limiters that get in our way of running, it's a great way to take a look at where are you prioritizing and how can we relook at some of the ways that we're putting things ahead of our own self, of our own health, of our own goals, our own potential happiness. So it's bigger than just I couldn't make my run. Well, it's more than that. I may not, you know, I might have that mental anguish of not meeting my goal or the disappointment I'm gonna have to face of not, you know, losing the weight that I wanted to lose or not sleeping as well because I haven't been able to get out there and just be physical. There's so much of a key to happiness is just physical movement, right? So, it's good to know that there are two different ways that we can talk about it. You know, you can, at the end of the day, you can talk to yourself or your coach or whoever about, I was consistent and these are the results, or I wasn't consistent and these are the results. And so think about that end conversation and where do you wanna be? And I think that's also a good motivator to be consistent with your training. And not only that, but being consistent also helps avoid injury, which is so important when getting started. If you just are slow and low with your training, train on appropriate intervals for what feels good to you and just allowing yourself to get stronger and committing to that, then that's where you're gonna have a safe journey as far as not getting injured. So we don't wanna, there are people who do the opposite, right? Who are so excited.

Most people make that mistake.

Right, and so you end up with a runner that's been injured and then out for six to eight weeks or whatever because they were too hard, too fast, wanted to meet a certain time goal right away. And we have to just explain, and I hope to explain to you all here as well, that's just not how it works with running. It just takes time. We follow, have for many years followed the literate principle, right? And that you've got to build that base in the beginning for your training. And you can't chip away at that base with a big chisel of speed and explosive, you know, workouts and bunch of distance at first, because you haven't gotten that base structural strength. So that's when you work on and commit to in the beginning when we're getting started. Low and slow miles and knowing that that's gonna take you to all those other goals of speed, of distance. That is all gonna come from it.

We'll get to that more in a second. Have you ever regretted a run, Marilyn?

I have, actually. Yeah, I feel like a very clear example of this.

Tell me.

Okay, so it was like right when I started running, and I didn't really understand training principles yet. And it was a really hot June summer day. It was the Moody, or what's it called? Maude's Moonlight Margarita Run. Okay, which is a 5K in town. Yeah, 5K in town. And I've always, I'm 5'2", I'm pretty small frame. But I've always just been, for my size, I guess, like a little fast little runner. You know, I can go fast if my training dictates that, right? If I'm trained to be fast and I'm loyal to my training, then I can be, for me, for my definition of fast, right? So my own definition of fast and my own PR goals have been coming up to this 5K without having trained very much, just knowing that I ran in my background life in college and whatever and young adulthood. And I went up to that line and just shot out of the gate. You know, just fast, just going like, oh my gosh, I can't believe this feels so good. This is so much fun. I love this. And sure enough, you know, about around my own two and a half or so, the wheels start to come off, right? Like your body is just collapsing. Like you're, the lactic acid is so built up, like you really can't move forward anymore. And then, and then everyone just, whoom, starts passing you, passing, passing. You're just dropping back and back and back and the people that you started the race with that you thought, oh my gosh, they don't really know much about running. You know, they start passing you and you're like, wow, I really made a mistake. So I had very little training, no kind of plan surrounding nutrition or hydration. You know, just go was the thing. And that was too hard, too fast, too soon, right? And I will never forget that race. And many years later, I came back into that race again. I'll have several times. It's a great race in town. But it's always been what I define as like my Vendetta race you know. Like, I go back and I had to But you don't really regret it though, Marilyn, right?

Because you learned so much from it. So it really wasn't regret. It was more maybe disappointment okay, yeah okay, that's a better way to define it. Maybe swallowing a little bit of pride in ego. But ultimately, I'm sure you value that experience because it taught you a lesson Absolutely. or a series of lessons that you now have made you stronger, right?

Right, and ive kept me in. But gosh, regretting a race, that's hard to say. I mean-

Or I run, at all. I mean, I'm just saying, I've never regretted getting out there.

Yeah.

Never, ever.

I was like, uh-oh, I'm trying to think in my head.

No, you're fine. I mean, even the worst conditions, like, I've just never regretted- I've regretted not doing a run so many times when I decided to skip or sleep in or hit snooze or missed my alarm or didn't go for whatever reason. I've regretted not running, but I've never regretted running.

No, no, Chris, me neither. I certainly haven't either, and you always feel so good.

It's like once you get out there, you're like, oh, yeah, you feel good. And even if it didn't go well, at least you're like, man, I worked.

Yes, I did it.

I worked, I did it. I learned something. And so that's sort of my point here, is that you're not gonna regret getting out there.

No.

If you just commit to that routine that one of my friends would always say, he's like, Chris, you gotta choose the pain of discipline or the pain of regret. If you choose the pain of discipline, you never regret it. But if you choose missing and not being disciplined, then you always regret it.

That is so true. I love that statement.

So that's sort of the when, now and consistently, right? On a routine, the where. What about the where? I think this comes up a lot for people. They're like, well, where do I do it? Or maybe they think I don't have a safe place to do it. So what do you advise there?

Well, you know, I think that you have to, everyone has to take their own individual situation and decide what's best for you. So I think the where is always gonna correlate with just do it, right? So we wanna find some place, obviously, like you said, that's safe. I mean, that's key, right? So that might be, depending on your situation, that may be indoors, you know, or because right now, let's say, you're living in the polar vortex, you know, what's happening right now. Well, we probably don't wanna go, yeah, go out in that. Or, you know, you only have time at night, yet, you know, you don't wanna go out in, I don't know, like an unsafe area of town where you may live at nighttime, or you're traveling and you're in a hotel and you don't have good surroundings or whatever. The where, to me, is just wherever is accessible for you to do it, where you feel safe. So, usually the lowest barrier to entry, like we were saying, is just right out of your front door, right? If you can. If that doesn't work for you, then you can think about spaces like a track in town. Most places have a public school track, a high school or a middle school, where that exists. And that's a public space where there's probably gonna be other people. So it could be a good place to get started. If you have running trails in your town, trails are a great place to get started for beginners, because it sort of breaks up the monotony of just pounding pavement, right? It's something a little bit different for your mind to focus on. And that could also of course involve walking in the beginning till you get your feet under those rocks and roots and all that. There's also a gym environment, like we were talking about. A lot of places will have an indoor running track, even if it's short. Or if your kid is at, or whoever, whomever you're with at the time, if they're in a large building, just go around the perimeter of the building. That's another thing. Utilizing just whatever is available to you. But the general answer would be outside in a neighborhood, hopefully in a place where there's not a ton of traffic, so it's safe. Or within a training group, where there's planned routes for you. If you have a route that someone has created, by all means, use it. Another great resource is using online communities, like MyFitnessPal or Strava, MattMyRun. MattMyRun's one of my favorite ones when I go to someplace where I'm not familiar with, to just look up what the users there have posted, have a good place to run for a certain distance. Those are so helpful.

MattMyRun has a great search tool where you can basically choose location, distance, terrain, and do a search in your area to find routes. And I think that's an underutilized resource because I think a lot of times we think we know where people run or where the options are. But even now, I constantly discover new places in Austin to run, not necessarily streets, because we're pretty thorough about hitting all the streets in town, but I'll see people post about a trail that I've never heard of. I'm like, oh, and I'm about to train for a trail race. I need to go check that out. That's nothing I ever knew about. And so just opening up your eyes and finding local resources, you can call the local running store and say, hey, where are good places to run? Where do people go? And so I think recognizing that you probably don't know all the options and seeking out those resources, whether they be online or just giving a call to that local running store. I think that can be hugely valuable, just opening up the possibilities. And it's also more fun. It's like, I'm someone who hates retreading routes or I hate doing out and backs because I just like new terrain. And so I'm constantly trying out new routes or new roads or going in new directions. And that keeps it interesting for me. And if I don't do that, then I get, it gets really monotonous and it's not any fun. So I would encourage especially a new person to, yeah, find your niche where you know your go-tos, you know, that are close to home or out your door, whatever it may be, but then also explore a little bit and try some new things and see what you find.

It is an awesome way to get to know your city where you live by foot. You'll see things in a different way. You'll get to, you know, experience the different neighborhoods, you know, around your town or opportunities where you can learn about. That's one of the things I remember I loved the most whenever I started doing long runs with Rogue was just discovering the city by foot. You know, it's such a neat opportunity. So that's just an added benefit, right, to becoming, being a beginning runner, is just seeing your own area in a different way.

Yeah, and if you do travel, that's my favorite way to see a new city, is just get out on foot. Even if it means starting by walking or doing a walk run, because I'm not exactly sure where I'm going. But that's a fun way. Just keep it interesting, keep it fun. Think holistically. It doesn't have to look a certain way. And I encourage people to mix it up a little bit there to keep it fun. So that's the where, essentially anywhere, but find your spots. And then, let's talk about the how. Which is, I think the meat of maybe where a lot of questions come, you've already teed up this idea that you gotta start slowly. And I think that's the number one mistake people make when they start a program, is that they think they have to go fast to get a benefit or to feel like they're actually doing it. They have to suffer and be in pain. And if they're not in pain, it's not working, or they're somehow not achieving anything. And that is the worst thing you can do. The number one variable, besides consistency, in getting started in a program, is to start slowly, well within your wheelhouse of whatever you can do from a pace perspective or from a walk, run, combo perspective. You shouldn't finish any of these initial runs, walks, workouts, however you want to define that word or use whatever word you want to use. You shouldn't finish any of them feeling so beat up or so spent that you couldn't go a little bit longer.

Right.

And so let's just start there. How do people make sure they're starting slowly enough?

Well, I think that that just requires a little bit of trial and error in the beginning. And thinking, I'm not gonna overshoot this right now, I'm gonna undershoot it. And I think that's actually a welcome concept for a lot of beginners because it kind of takes some of the pressure off, you know? We here at Rogue in our intro program, our Couch to 5K, 10K program have a tiered training system that has specific instructions about if you're just starting, keep it at this level, or you're defined as this certain level if you can run for 20 minutes or 30 minutes or whatever. So, I think having some parameters, whether they're set for you or you set them yourself in the beginning can be helpful. And saying, I'm not gonna go over that parameter. So, that's why I always like to encourage runners to just start with what feels comfortable. Let your body govern what makes sense. Run gently and steadily in the beginning as you can. Because we can pretty much all, we don't have to start from a walk. We can start jogging just from a standing position. So, just start jogging at a comfortable pace. And what we define that is a nice conversational pace. So, if you're running with someone at your side, you can carry on a conversation with them and you don't sound like this. So, you don't wanna sound like that when you're talking to them, right? It's just a normal conversation. And if you're getting that breathy, can't really carry the conversation tone, then you just need to dial back your effort a little bit. And if you're by yourself, that's a little harder to gauge. But, you know, open mouth breathing is kind of a good physical cue of going too hard in the beginning, right? Like if you're at your 80 to 85% maximum exertion level, you're likely open mouth breathing, breathing hard. But if you can breathe comfortably, like in a controlled sense while you're running, that's also a good governor of, is this an appropriate pace for me?

So what do you do when it gets out of control?

So in that case, you just dial down your effort a little bit. You just start, you just bring it down a notch. You know, it's like, we just like to say...

Maybe walk if you need to.

You can walk if you need to. You can jog a little slower. And the key to that, you know, knowing when to move on to the next piece, like coming back to your run, maybe at a slower pace, is run when you start to feel comfortable, when you start to feel a bit more recovered. You're not feeling all the heat throughout your body. Your heart isn't pounding quite as fast. Your breath has slowed some. But it's not like it was when you were standing still, obviously, because we're still in anaerobic activity. So just start from where you think, you know, you're comfortable. Don't go too hard to where you're pushing so hard that you're having some of those limiting cues like we just talked about. But instead, start a little bit under that. You know, just allow yourself to just run easy for as long as you want, stop, and then start again. Or if you don't need to stop, then don't. Just keep going. And for your set, you know, specific, whatever you've set for yourself amount of time, a good beginning run time, I think is a good way to start is just 20 minutes. You know, 20 to 30 minute. On our very first day one of our programs, we have our very beginning people doing a 20 minute run. 10 minutes out, 10 minutes back. So that's a good way to start if you haven't done anything. If you've gone longer, then you can stretch that time interval out a bit. But you do have to have some type of thought around, is this comfortable or is this not? And that's kind of the baseline question to define when do I stop and when do I start.

Two questions. One, some people will say, Marilyn, you're crazy. There's no way I can talk running, period. Like I don't even understand. I can't even conceptualize that. How is that possible that I could speak while running? It's so foreign, especially for somebody new. So what would you say to that person?

Well, I would say that it is possible. You know, I would say we see it all the time. It does happen. It's a good way to go the pace that's appropriate for you, and that might be walking. You know, if you can't do it, then perhaps we need to begin with walking and then just pepper in our intervals of running, like maybe just 30 seconds period of running followed by a walk, or a minutes period of walking followed by a walk. So I would just say, I guess it's kind of a hard question because I see it all the time, so I know that it is possible. It's not possible if you're going too hard. So then you've got to bring it back.

Then back off, however that may mean. It might mean walking, and that's okay. Some people also I know want to get really specific about run-walk intervals. I assume you get this question. Well, what should my interval be? How many minutes running? How many minutes walking? How do you address that need or for somebody who wants something more prescriptive on run-walk?

Well, for those runners, I just go back to the fact that you are your own governor. You have to set your interval in the beginning. So I recommend that runners bring a timing device on day one, whether that's a Timex watch or your phone or a Garmin or whatever, something that can track time so you're not counting, which I guess you could do, but would be very difficult. But what we want you to do is have some type of way to see where your comfort level is in the beginning. I always recommend run until, like I've said, you know, run until you're not comfortable anymore, and if you feel out of control at any time, bring it down, and then stop and walk. So how long was that run? You know, and then walk for a bit. And then when you get to see how long that walk was, then you've got one interval, right? Then you do it again. And you start to see, is there any consistency? If there's not, then you can try and think of some type of interval that you think might work for you, based on that trial literal run, right? So say, okay, kind of what I saw was I ran for about 10 minutes, and then I got really uncomfortable, and I walked for five, and then I ran for like six, and then I walked for about five. And so if you see that there's not a whole lot of consistency, you just kind of look at that total aggregate number of time that you walked, and the aggregate time that you ran, divide it by the number of intervals that you have, and you can come up with some type of average to try out as a structured interval, if that's something that motivates you, because there are runners that need and want some type of structure to it. But, and that will actually, it will happen. But I like to always encourage to not start off, at Rogue, we don't define an interval right away of we're gonna run five, we're gonna walk two, period. Because that just doesn't work for everyone.

It's very individual, yep.

It is, individual basis. So, see what you're doing. See what is normal for you. If you're not seeing any kind of clear pattern, then again, do some math behind it, and see if you can find something that gives you a little bit more structure.

So, talked about starting easy. How many days would you tell somebody to start with? Well, a week.

Yeah, that's a good question. But I guess my response to that is also, it depends on what else you're doing, activity-wise. We at Rogue like to see some type of cross-training worked within running that can support your running, support your structural strength, like we've talked about some in this podcast, and something that can also be restorative. You know, whether it's just walking your dog or doing a yoga class, something that can give you a slow, low-interval benefit, such as, like I said, walking or stretching, which can bring such a wonderful benefit to your body when you're putting all this new stimulus on it, stimuli. But I would say that on the most part, three to four days, I would say three minimum is what I'd like to see, you know, from my new runners. Our program writes in a little bit more than three days a week for running from the very start. And I love to see that if it works with your lifestyle. But what's most important to me as the coach and someone that wants to see you succeed just in life and, you know, as a friend here at Rogue, is to allow the running journey to become a part of your life. So if four days or whatever, however five, if that's too much, then that's too much. You know, it's good to try and start with something that you can do and will do while incorporating this whole new thing into your lifestyle. So three days is my recommendation. You know, you'll have a here with our training programs. We've got one day that's built in as a quality workout where we're doing some of more of our fast running or specialized stuff on the hills or just working on a certain skill. And another day we'll have a longer run that we want to define as what we call our long run day. And that's going to be your mileage that incrementally increases with little drops throughout the week, defined as recovery weeks. And then-

Long being a relative term to whatever you're starting quite.

Our long runs for our beginning runners are one to two miles, you know, range. Lowest is one and highest is two for week one. So, and again, completely relative to you. And then we have one more day, which is gonna support your long run, and that we define as the medium long run, right? It's a percentage of the long run. We don't have to get that technical in the beginning. Just three days of running is gonna, again, add to that consistency of that constant stimulus on your body that your body needs to develop to be a structurally sound runner, right? That's something that I learned, it was from John Schrupp, really well. It's something that was important to do to commit to that so that your knees aren't aching like you were talking about in the beginning. It's that strength that we allow ourselves to have that comes from the consistency. So yeah, my recommendation is three. If you can do four, then that would be awesome.

Or three running, one day cross training, as you said, some sort of other activity, as we mentioned earlier, the consistent routine is important. One thing I do want to point out here is that some people might, and if they're doing their efforts easy enough, then they'll be able to minimize this, but you're gonna see as a new runner that you might have some soreness lingering on that second day or that third day, or it might pop up at some point when you've maybe too aggressively switched your intervals in some way. And one thing I want to remind people is that when your muscles are hurting like that, the best thing you could do is go out and move easy again.

Yes.

Not doing anything is actually less productive for them than going out and then moving easy again. I say it often, I say it maybe too much to my runners, movement equals blood flow equals healing. And so if you're a little bit sore from that day before, still go out the next day, but just start even easier. Start at a walk if that's what you need to sort of work the legs out and get them moving again and have some of that soreness dissipate. But getting back out that next time versus skipping it because you're quote unquote too sore, it's gonna be so much better for you, not just for consistency purposes, but also actually recovering from that prior soreness.

Such a good point. I completely agree with that. What we say is, I think it's like motion is lotion, right? Like that's our little rhyme that we use.

That's even better than mine.

Horseshoe, yeah. So. Motion is lotion.

Trademark that, Marilyn.

Well, I think I learned it from someone over here. I don't know who. I probably did, so I can't trademark it. But I will say that it is true. I mean, it's exactly right. And that's not a reason to quit because you're sore. You know, that just means that you're seeing changes in your body. They're happening. And again, yeah, like you said, just making that adjustment is what's so important to just continue and to allow your body to just get used to it. And you know what? As you are consistent, that happens less and less frequently. And you will not feel that, you know, for as long as you think you might. And don't let that make you quit because that's just the side effect of getting stronger.

So three days running, easy running. As the foundation, you mentioned the fact that we have what we call a quality day in our programming, which scales according to ability, but where people do a little faster running. It's not just purely easy running. It's faster running in doses with recovery, and it's managed in a way that builds and that scales according to ability. When should somebody, if they're training on their own, considers adding that to their routine? Or should they?

I think that it's a great thing to add in. And I would venture to say, from the beginning, it's okay to do that in a very controlled way. And the reason I say that is because we do that here. I would say maybe the first week, no. But as you go through your training, to me, I think it's great to have something that you're gonna be proud of, that you accomplished, that you did, that you maybe didn't want to do. Not all of us think, I'm gonna go out today and I'm gonna run that one minute hard, and I'm gonna run those four minutes at an easy jog. We might just be inclined to just get our headphones on and go out to the trail and just exist or whatever the road and just be in the zone of my easy paced run, which is good, and we wanna do that. But I think that it's exciting and that it really brings a sense of accomplishment to pepper in some of those, what we call intervals, I think is the best way to get started or even just changing your terrain a little bit, like finding a hill in your neighborhood and doing three or four hill repeats. Something that you wouldn't have done in the past to give you a sense of accomplishment, because gosh, that really bleeds over to mental strength when you get to do things like your race, if you have a target 5K or something that you're striving for. To think back on those workouts where you challenge yourself a little bit and got a real benefit from it, and met the challenge really comes into play when you're not only physically executing your race, but mentally as well. You go, oh, I remember that. Like just this Saturday, I was here with the runners, and it was like 35 degrees. And right when everyone walked outside at 7 a.m., the group that departs with me, at 7 a.m., here comes the rain. And I'm thinking, oh my gosh, and these are all beginning runners. I'm thinking, this is a challenge for any runner, weather-wise, but here we are. Everyone's gonna do it. And sure enough, when everyone came back, it's like, god, that's just such a feather in your cap to be like, I didn't want to do it, but I did. I didn't think I could. I didn't think I was ready, but I did it anyway. And-

And they probably loved it, because once you get going out there in the rain, it's fun.

Yeah, it is. It's like being a kid. It's like running around in the rain outside on your block, like when you were in second grade. And a lot of running, actually, on that note, is like that. That's another thing I always try to stress to my runners. Y'all, running is fun. Like, we do this for fun. Like, it's not a, you're an adult, you know, you choose what you're gonna do with your free time. And this is what we've chosen, you know, is to be out here doing this running thing. And so if it's not fun or it's not becoming fun, like, try to think of a way that it can become fun for you again. Like, maybe you just relax all ideas around timing and pace and all that. And just run like you did when you were at the bell ring and you were in fifth grade, and you ran out to that playground, and you knew you were going to find all your friends. And just remember that moment when you would run, like, from your classroom out to the playground. Well, that's what we want to do with running, you know, as much as we can, is just to make it carefree, to make it filled with joy, and to really just be thankful that we can move through space and time in that way. And so I think that, you know, just those workouts where we do give ourselves a little bit more of a challenge, I personally feel that that comes in a little bit more. So it's not just the miles just kind of going.

It could be, as you said, one day a week where you're just mixing it up a little bit. It could come in the form of what we call a far lake, where you're just for a certain period of time, picking it up to a little bit faster pace. Could be 30 seconds, could be a minute, and then backing off for a period of time until you're recovered, and then doing it again, doing six reps of that, or four reps of that to start, and or as you mentioned, maybe hills, where you're doing hard up the hill, you know, a little bit harder pace up the hill, easy back down, hard up for four to six reps as a starting place. Or, you know, simply using a measured distance. You know, we like to do a workout where you might choose a city block, and you run hard on two opposing sides of that block, and then easy on the other two sides. And that sort of in and out, or on and off kind of opportunity to run makes it fun, as you said. It also, by going a little bit faster, it improves efficiency. You tend to be more economical at faster paces naturally. Your body finds that natural rhythm for itself, and so that will also help improve your form and your efficiency that will make easier paces feel more comfortable when you go back. So.

One thing that I'd like to mention that is a real easy way to work in an interval, like we're talking about a little burst of speed, like a fartlet type thing, that's a really, it's easy to find a place to do this, because all you need is a straight road, right? We do think something here at Rogue called strides, and all you need is a straightaway, and it doesn't even have to be of any specific distance, but if you can make it, you know, 100 meters or so or whatever, then that's good. So what you do for a stride is you just find a straight area, and for the first third of that set distance, you ramp up your speed. Now, you start in the beginning, and you just start going faster while remaining relaxed. Like the key to a stride is to remain completely relaxed, right? So put your foot on the gas, and when you get to whatever the marker is that you use for the third, in the first third, then you're gonna just keep that pace. Whatever it is, it doesn't have to be super fast. You don't have to be running your sprint speed. I mean, that's not what we're after. What we're after is a faster speed than what we were at when we started. So then you hold that speed for that middle third of your distance, whatever it is. You can measure driveway to driveway, whatever. Hold it and try to relax in that middle section. Try to be tall and light, and that's gonna lead to fast, right? And try to be efficient in running through that space and time. And try to avoid clenching and clenching your teeth and getting real, your shoulders come up and your hands clench. So try to avoid all of that. Instead, just run at your fast pace, your fast for that day pace in the middle. And then when you get to that third third, you just take your foot off the gas and you just slow down to a walk. And there you go. You've done a little bit of speed work right there on your city block or whatever, your street that's right there in front of you. And you don't have to try to figure anything out. And that's such a good way to practice that efficiency and economy that again, like you said, translates to more efficient running in the future overall.

And then you can walk back or easy jog back to the start and repeat that.

Exactly.

We often tell people to start with four of those and then build up to maybe six or eight.

And that's another thing about the interval thing about doing these little challenges for yourself is that if you even just write it down, when you get home, jot it down on a piece of paper, make a note in your phone. So that way, when you do it again in the following subsequent weeks, you've got something to challenge yourself against. Okay, last time I did four, so this time I'm gonna do five. And you have to be careful with that. I mean, we're not trying to climb a mountain where we're always adding, adding, adding, adding. We like to build for a couple of weeks, maybe two or three, and then drop down for one week, and then build up again, and then drop back down. So we like to have that healthy recovery because after all, when we recover is when we become more strong. I mean, we, our muscles are literally tearing and growing when we're running and becoming stronger. So you have to allow that muscle fiber to build itself back again, to create new fibers that are stronger and denser and better, and therefore more efficient for the future and more oxygen carrying blood and all the things that come from building upon itself. But if we don't work in recovery and also recovery days during your week where you're not running, then you risk overtraining, overuse and injury.

Now, we talked about cross training to supplement running, which can be a good tool. If you had to suggest one other activity, because we talk about it all the time, it's about the running, but it's also about all the other support activities, and there's a long list of those things that you could recommend to people, but so that we don't make it overwhelming for a beginner, what's the one other activity you would recommend them do? Is it stretching? Is it foot drills? Is it foam rolling? Where do you start there?

Well, the three of those that you mentioned just now, foam rolling, excuse me, stretching, foot drills, those are all what I define as self-care measures. So to me, those are essential. I don't recommend compromising that for any reason. You've got to stretch. You've got to allow your body to release some of those things that you've done, whether it's through something structured like trigger point or foam rolling. And all of that, of course, if you don't know what that means, we could do a whole other episode about all of that in a different time. But you can look all of that up, certainly on YouTube. But those to me is something separate from cross-training. That to me is just a self-care measure that you do consistently. I would say at least three times a week for maybe 10 to 15 minutes. But on a cross-training sense, which we define as any activity other than running, I think that for a very beginner, something very low-impact and restorative like yoga is great because that is also exercise. I mean, that's an active practice. It's not just sitting on your floor and doing your stretches and stuff. So that could be a good one. But me personally, and what I really like to see runners do if they can, is to incorporate an element of strength training. Whether that is something that you're just utilizing body weight, maybe you find a program on YouTube, a 15-minute program that's like a core program, to help solidify that middle section of our body, which is the only stationary thing that's standing still when we're in running motion or walking motion. Or if it's going to a gym class and utilizing weights or just using free weights in your home, I think the resistance that comes from weight training really translates well into providing a different type of strength that's going to help you with your running. So if you can do some type of structural thing, and it can be even as simple as something like you were mentioning earlier, step-ups, lunges, push-ups, planks, doing little things that you can do in your backyard. That all counts, and that's all helpful. So even just a short list of those are great. And we have several that we kind of roll out to our runners in this program that we lead here over time, so they can find what works for them and what works best for their bodies. But really, just anything else, because your body does need a different type of stimulus on itself.

I will point out that if people go to our website under resources, we have a tab called Rogue Routines that has our recommended foot gel routine, which helps work on ankle strength and mobility to reduce some of those lower leg injuries that might pop up. We have a stretching routine on there that we recommend doing post-workout, and we also have some very basic foam rolling techniques that you can use as a starting place if you want to add that to your routine to help stay healthy and consistent. The main thing I always emphasize is that one thing done consistently is better than eight things done inconsistently. Add one piece to your routine, make it stick, and then as you can, add more, or maybe adjust and try something else for a period of time just to experiment and see what really works for you. I do find that these self-care measures, as you call them, are very personal and individualized, and what I need versus what you need post-run to stay healthy are going to be very different. And so we do have to experiment with these different modalities to see what makes us feel good so that we can keep going, and then once we find that routine, be consistent with it. So that's a lot about the how, and I wanted to finish up with the why, and really you could probably have started with the why. Because the why is, you know, why do we keep doing this, and why do we start, why do we keep doing, why do we, how does that why evolve over time? The why becomes an ever-present theme that can evolve as your running journey evolves. I think it's really important to have a crystal clear vision, regardless of where you are, whether you're starting or whether you're experienced, as to why you do this. And for some people, it can start out very simply. Like, I'm doing this to lose weight, or I'm doing this to be healthy, or I'm doing this to set an example for my children, or whatever it may be. Those reasons can be pretty simple. They don't have to be huge answers to existential questions about why you're here on this planet. But spending some time reflecting on that, why at the beginning of your journey is important, because then that gives you a home base to come back to when you struggle with inconsistency, when you want to turn the alarm off and not wake up, when you maybe miss a day, but then need to get back on it the next day so that you don't create this inconsistent stretch during your journey. So, talk about the why for you, and how do you talk about it with new runners?

Well, I think the why is just such the beautiful part of running. And it comes to everyone in a different way. But for me, the why is because, at its root sense, is because I can. I just feel that, for me, I feel so thankful that I'm able to stand, that I'm able to move, that I'm healthy enough to run. And what I mean by that is, I'm not in a hospital bed. I don't have a chronic illness that's preventing me from moving through space in a way that makes me happy. So, I always just like to start off with that with new runners, is just remembering to be so honoring and thankful of what they do have, no matter where they're starting from, that that there is something to be celebrated, right? Even before you've even taken a step. The fact that you can is so key. So, I agree with you that it looks completely different for every single person, and you have to find that, you know, like within yourself of like, you know, am I doing this for better nutrition? Am I, or excuse me, am I going to do this, you know, to have a better, a healthier lifestyle? And I can do this to sleep better? Am I going to do this to be an example or just to lose weight? I mean, all of those are, like you said, pretty common. But I just want to remind you all about how moving and life-changing running can be if you let it. Like, that's one thing that we do say here at Rogue, and I've always felt so privileged to be able to do, is to be on this journey of life-changing moments, life-changing experiences through the sport of running. And it's just, to me, if you will just buy into this, that running is so much bigger than just the self. It's so much more important. The way that you will improve as a person from running is deep. You're happier. You're more relaxed. That bleeds over into your work, into your home life, to be able to interact with. Those wonderful endorphins that we get when we run, oh my gosh, that's so much of the time. If I'm having a bad day, I just go for a run, and I feel better. Because I did something for myself. And of course, scientifically, we do have those endorphins that really do make us feel better. So, if you can just believe and know that if you do this sport, if you want to try it, and you give it a chance, I truly believe that you're going to find some of this beauty that comes from, that's not really explainable until you start, until you get on this journey, until you join us in this awesome quest of life through running. So the why, again, I mean, it's hard to define, but for me, that's what it's about. And for you, that may not make any sense. That muscle might be a ______.

No, it's awesome. It is. It's a vehicle for life change. And if you open yourself up to the fact that this is more than the running, it's more than just the movement.

Just allow yourself to consider that.

And I think to tap into that, you need to embrace the process, to be consistent, to give it a chance, to sign up for a race, put yourself out there, to set goals and be willing to fail at those goals, to find others that you can connect with through the activity of running. You do need to open yourself up to those things, to make it about more than just running. But if you do, then it's a vehicle for life change. It will give you power in so many ways outside of the activity itself that are impossible to explain or understand. They're going to manifest differently for each person. But that will change your life.

It's so true.

And that's the magic for me as a coach, is to see that happen. And to see it happen for them in different ways over time, too, as they experience different levels in their journey. And it's so powerful. The one thing I caution people about on this question of why is that, in my opinion, it's not sustainable if you're doing it for someone else. If you're doing it because your partner wants you to or a family member thinks you should, that can get you started, but it's not sustainable. You've got to have your own reasons for doing it. And so that would be one cautionary, I would say, is sure, if somebody's like, hey, if a friend of yours is like, hey, you need to do this, let's do this together, that can get you started. But it's not going to keep you going unless you then find your own reason apart from that person. And so that would be the one encouragement I would offer, is that, you know, just make sure it's about you. And it could be about connecting to others because that's what you want to find. But you shouldn't be doing it because someone else wants to connect to you or because they think you need to do it. That's not a recipe for long-term success, I think.

I completely agree with that, you know, because at the end of the day, it is your journey, right? I always say that it's your run, it's your race, it's your journey. So finding that why and how it connects deeply to you is beautiful. And you know what? Also, it's okay if you don't have something that's, you know, even if your why is something so simple, you know, something just very basic. That is a why. It doesn't have to be, you know, to feel this on this deep level like we do. Because I do believe that you will get there. I really, really do. But just knowing that no matter what the reason is, just to get out your door and just to start, just to go, and just give yourself a chance to open yourself up to this world, a possibility that may be, through running for you, is such a beautiful gift you can give yourself.

Take the first step. But, of course, it's not all rainbows and unicorns.

No.

It's going to be hard. There are going to be moments when you don't want to do it. There's going to be sebeks. There's going to be challenges. There's going to be times when you think you can't. But that's a part of the beauty of the process, too, is that if you keep doing it, if you keep stepping through it, you'll overcome those things, and then that builds confidence that then also impacts you in other ways.

And also, what in life isn't, right? What's super easy all the time? Nothing, right? I mean, so just on that reality basis, we have to say, yeah, it's going to have peaks and valleys, but just stay the course and enjoy the journey.

So we'll leave it with a quote you'd written down here in your outline, which I alluded to a little bit, at least in terms of what Bill Bauman said, but you say here in your notes, if you're a human, you're a runner. And just like Bill Bauman said, if you have a body, you're an athlete. And so if you're listening to this, own that. Take that first step. Hopefully this was helpful. If you're in Austin, come check us out. We've got plenty of opportunity for you to work with us, including Marilyn herself, through our Catch the 5K program. You can find more info on that at roguerunning.com, of course. But if you're not here, find a program near you and just get started. There you go. Thanks, Marilyn, for joining us.

Thank you so much for having me. It was a real pleasure.

Awesome. Well, I hope you enjoyed that discussion with Marilyn. Maybe learned some things. Maybe either learned something you can use yourself to get started or maybe something you can help others to get started with. So take it, pass it along, get started, find a friend, and just take that first step. It's definitely the hardest one, as I've seen with many, many athletes here at Rogue through the years. All right, so there you go. That is episode 114 of the Running Rogue podcast. As always, you can check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Instagram, Twitter, or Facebook at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.