Hey everybody, it is episode 33 of the Running Rogue Podcast. This is Chris joining you with Steve, as always. Hey Steve.

Hello, podcast world.

We are super excited to have our guest today, Kevin Leahy. He is the husband of a rogue runner, and actually a non-runner himself, but is going to be bringing the non-runner perspective to this conversation. We're actually gonna be talking about the alchemy of coaching and debating whether or not running is magic or science, essentially, as we go into this. And it's gonna be fascinating, because this is probably the first podcast where I have no clue where we're gonna end up, Steve. But...

I unfortunately do. I've had, Kevin's a good friend of mine, and he and I have had many, many long conversations, some beer-induced, others actually focusing clearly on the method that Kevin uses to help people break through barriers and things. So I have been subjected to some of them, what we'll be subjected to today. But I will tell you, amazing things have come from it.

Kevin is a part-time lawyer, full-time philosopher. So we're gonna be getting into some philosophical stuff. We're talking about running and magic, and how much is science versus magic. So it's gonna be interesting. We'll get to that in a second. As we usually do, we're gonna start with a few current events before we dive in with Kevin. First, I wanna talk about the latest situation with Dathan Ritzenhine, who we just found out has signed to run with Brooks Hanson. And Dathan was a long-time Nike athlete, lost his contract there, which was probably a combination of performance and a combination of him not wanting to play the Oregon Project Games as the shroud of doubt came over that group. And so he had moved back to Michigan where he grew up. Actually, he went to high school with an Oregon Colligan who runs with us. And now is training with Brooks and the Hansons, Hanson brothers there, which I think is a really interesting pickup for them. It's a great pickup for them, obviously, because I think Dathan still has some talent, or at least we know he has talent, but he still has some results to go after. But what do you think about this move, Steve?

I think it's a win for both parties. I think Dathan needs guidance. He did run well sort of doing his own thing. I think I went back to his high school coach. I don't really exactly know who was coaching him over the last window. He did have some really good results, but I think that he needs... He seems to be a kind of athlete that needs help, guidance. And someone, as we like to talk about, giving somebody a good start line experience, I think when you think about your own training so much and wonder if you're doing appropriate work, it's hard to do all the other little things that are essential to running at your best. So I really think that he's going to benefit greatly. And the Hansons has, while they've had Desi on the women's side or in their whole organization running at an incredibly high level, they haven't in recent years, in fact, really, in the last 8 to 10 years, had a significant male performer at a really, really high level. So I think it's fantastic to highlight the kind of coaching that the Hansons do, the quality of coaches they are. And again, they're one of the few groups in the country that's marathon-centric. So him going to that group just makes perfect sense. And I think we're going to see some great results. To me, it says, I look at Dathan as definitely being a contender in 2020, and he'll be a little long on the tooth at that point.

I hope so. I mean, he's a guy who's a former 5K record holder for the US, has many, many US championships at cross-country level, 5K, 10K level. He's an Olympian, although just missed the Olympics in the fourth spot in 2012 and DNF'd at the trials in 2016. So the last two Olympic cycles have not been so kind to him. He is a 207 and change marathoner, but has always struggled a little bit with fueling in the marathon. So I think the Hanson's group will help him hopefully figure that out. And I would love to see him running well again. You know, he's a guy that is now 34. So he's really not that old. He's been around the scene for a long time because he's been a precocious performer since high school days.

Well, we've seen... I mean, we had Abdi, who's run in his 40s at a really high level at the marathon distance. You have Meb, who's run at a really high level in his 40s at the marathon. So I think that he's got... And you know, he gets unfairly pigeonholed as an injury-prone athlete. And I think really what happened when he was training with his Alizar is that too much experimentation was going on and not enough just aerobic development and working on the key parts of the late-race dramatics that happen for everyone in the end of the marathon. And I think Kevin and Keith will be able to really help him highlight what's going on over those last six miles, and their training will be targeted not towards changing mechanics but more along the lines of focusing on being ready for what's going to happen.

So we'll see, but that's an interesting move, and I hope the best for both Dathan and for that group, because they are one, as they've proven with Desi and Brian Stelbo before her, that are doing it the right way just by blue collar getting out there, getting it done, doing the miles, and so hopefully great success comes to both of them. Speaking of the marathon, we've got to talk about Nick Simmons, because he just ran his last 800th USA Champs. And coming out of that, I watched his post-final 800 interview. He was already talking about his next race, because he said he needed another goal, and it was not the 800, but he has signed up for the Honolulu Marathon in December. It was clearly, he's a guy who's always thinking about the marketing angles of everything. It was clearly a run-gum, which is his business promotional opportunity, because he suddenly had this run-gum Honolulu Marathon entry available for those that were going to register for the contest to win that. But he's going to be doing the marathon in December. What do you think? Is this silly promo stuff, or is this something that's interesting?

It's painfully obvious it's silly promo stuff. Nick is a relatively low-volume 800-meter runner. I mean, he did run like 60 miles a week, I believe, or 70 at occasion, but he's definitely lower volume. And he's not built for it. He's not built for it physiologically. He's not built for it psychologically. He has no idea what he's getting ready to deal with. I predict either it will just be, you know, wave at the crowds, kissing babies, or he won't make it there if he truly trains for it because he'll get IT band syndrome. He'll have some planner issues. I mean, I don't know what his long run is, but I doubt it was ever further than 15 or 16 miles. So he's got a whole world of hurt coming towards him. But I do know one thing about Nick Simmons. He's smart as a whip. So he knows what he's doing. I'm sure he has respect enough for the sport. And I think in any other case, I would be more dismissive, except I know Nick isn't stupid. So he knows what he's doing, and he knows he's going to suffer, and he knows it's going to be painful. And so therefore, I tip my hat to him and say, go for it. My one suggestion to him as a coach, don't train too hard. Less is more in his case.

Get to the start line healthy.

You're going to suffer no matter what. You may be walking no matter what. But sub three would be a great result for him, in my opinion. I don't know if he could run a 240 to 245, even if he trained to the best of his ability, given the differences. I mean, I know he's tough enough. We do know Nick is tough. So the things that he'll be asked to do at the end of it, at the end of the race, he'll be able to manage. But it's so different from the 800. The pain is just so different. So we'll see.

You know, the 800 being the, what, the most painful track race potentially. So it is kind of interesting to compare the two.

Well, I've argued this case many times. I usually use the 5K as an example, but I always say the 5K and the Marathon are the same race, just on a different scale. And I also a lot of times say that the 800 and the 5K are very similar races, just on a different scale. So I guess if you put, if you're using true logic, then you'd say the 800 and the Marathon are similar. The scale is just so much different. So I do think the scale will be an issue for him, absolutely. But he knows, you know, what he felt over the last 150 meters of every 800 he's ever run, he will unfortunately be feeling for probably 15 miles. So the scale from 150 meters to 15 miles is a bit different from...

I think it'll be a kissing baby's experience. I think he's gonna focus on getting the start line healthy and then try to just cruise in the race and enjoy it and kind of...

And if he does that, he'll get the respect. I think he'll get so much respect for doing that. If he really tries to go for it, and I think this is where he's smart enough to, is that he just won't try, because to try and fail would be a bigger distraction from what he's really trying to achieve, which is to bring awareness to his product. And you know what?

And to the sport, though. That's why I got to give him some credit, because he is somebody who's super smart from a marketing perspective. He's doing video blogs, not daily, but every other day. If you follow him on Facebook, kind of following his journey now, training up to the marathon. So I got to give him credit for that, because even though it is a little bit of a marketing stunt, it is hopefully going to draw people to the sport or at least get attention for the sport. So I got to give him credit for that. And even if I find it maybe a little bit cheesy and overdone, you know, a little bit of PR like that is probably... or I would... you know, we need more PR like that probably at our sport, so I'm going to give it a pass.

I also think he'll be making our point for us.

Which is what?

That the marathon always wins.

The marathon always wins. Well, I think that's a good segue to our discussion with Mr. Kevin Leahy. Kevin, as I mentioned, is the husband of Corey Leahy. He trains with Rogue Soul Survivors, coached by Bobby Garcia. He's been witness to our training methodology for a long time. Always comes to Rogue Parties, has interacted with our group significantly, so he's sort of been an observer from the outside for a very long time. And as someone who's watched him operate at these parties, he actually quite enjoys this sort of view.

Oh yeah, he does.

This view from the fly-on-the-wall view of Rogue and all of its machinations from not only the running and training, but also the partying as well. So welcome, Kevin. Good to have you.

Great to be here, guys.

We're super excited to have you on. As I said, he's a lawyer by training, but really a philosopher is his real life's calling. And I can't really count the number of times I've ended up in a philosophical discussion with Kevin at one of Coach Bobby's parties. So always a good time, but we thought we'd bring him on and just see what would happen. But with that, Kevin, fantastic. I'm going to throw it to you, tee this conversation up for us, because this is a debate and conversation that you've been having with Steve for a long time.

You bet. So thanks. And hello, all of you out there. So the situation is coaching, and Steve and I have talked a lot about that. That's where we do have a very common bond and interest. I coach individuals often. It's called executive coaching. But the idea is coaching somebody for performance. If you're good now, why aren't you better tomorrow? And Steve and I have gotten into some pretty nifty, complex conversations. So that's what we wanted to bring to bear here. I want to let you all know it's going to be in four parts to follow along. The first part, which I'm going to kick off with the question real quick, is what are the raw ingredients needed to be a successful runner? To be a runner, and by success, I'd like to hear you all's definitions, so we can kind of kick that off. But what are the raw ingredients? That's the first thing I'd like us to talk about and review. And then I'd like to talk about the science of running. That's been, as Chris pointed out, one of the most fascinating things. What is Rogue doing that somebody who doesn't have the bandwidth to go out and get a coach is not getting? What is the science behind what you all do? And then the next thing is magic, something Steve and I have talked quite a bit about. We're pretty excited to kind of delve into that. And then lastly, and maybe all along, we're going to point to it, results. If you're out there listening, I anticipate, and if you're running, you are wanting results. You are wanting to get a PR. You are wanting to finish your first marathon. You are wanting to feel good about this sport. And I think that's what we're really doing here today, is talking about how to feel good about the sport and how to use the right assets and leverage great coaching, great facility, great, frankly, teammates, as I know, to get those results. Hey, let's kick off. Success. I'd like to, I'll just kind of point to one or the other and then let it go, but Chris, I'd like to get you first on the idea of what is success as a runner? What does that mean to you as a coach, not so much to you as a runner? And I know there's the distinction. Sure.

So, well, success as a coach, for me, is helping my athletes achieve their goals.

Perfect.

That, to me, is fairly straightforward as a coach, but the big challenge with that is helping the athlete figure out what their goal is or what their goal should be. So that can be trickier, especially when, especially when you get to know someone initially. You don't necessarily have a window into their soul yet. And a lot of times, if you ask somebody that question, what's your goal, then they'll spout out something that they think you want to hear or that they think others want to hear or they'll kind of take someone else's goal and co-opt it as their own because they think that's what should be important to them. And so for me, it takes some time to feel out that person and really understand if what they're telling me initially as their goal is really what they want. And we've talked about it before on here, which is, as a runner, you need to understand your purpose first before you can talk about your goals or set goals. Because if you don't understand why you're doing it, then you don't know what's important to you. And it's interesting. I've had several one-on-one conversations this week and last with my athletes because we're kind of in that window of trying to understand what they want to do for their full races. And I have a lot of new people in my group. And so I'm sitting down for the first time largely with one-on-one conversations with a lot of these people. And it's fascinating to me because I've had probably half of those conversations with new athletes where I walked away thinking that their goal isn't what they told me.

Yeah, that's a really good thing.

But I didn't have enough time with them yet to really dig to what it is. And then half of them, I'm like, okay, I think I have a pretty good sense, or maybe we got there in the conversation where they said one thing and I kind of pushed them to a new place because I had gotten a little more transparent view of their purpose.

Let's hold you off there. You're on a roll, and I didn't necessarily want to interrupt in case somebody listening really wanted to catch that. But here we are, ingredients, and you're giving us the whole story. So let's focus a little bit on ingredients. The reason I wanted success, and Steve, I'm gonna focus on your definition. So Chris, let's go back to your definition. It was getting the achievement that the runner is looking for, essentially. Just nailing it. And then Steve, what would you focus on as success, as a coach? What's the definition of success with respect to the runners you're coaching?

Mine's changed over time, for sure. But I've always been a cut people's heads off and shit down their throats kind of coach, where I want results.

I've heard about it.

I want results, and I want results, and I want results. But I've come to realize over the last, I don't know, probably four to five years, having worked with really fast athletes, that that really wasn't my goal. My goal really is transcendence. It's watching a human being transcend what they thought they were capable of and doing more. And sometimes that happens through success, through the actual physical reaching the goal, the result. Sometimes that's, it's through the failure. They get clearer. To me, I just use the goal now as a method of trying to find where they are in the continuum of likelihood for some huge personal breakthrough. I don't get my result, my vision of success. I don't get it very often. And I don't, it doesn't always play out philosophically, though I'm framing it that way.

You don't get it for yourself or for your coach or you as coach?

I don't see the result in the athlete that I'm trying so hard to get. So I'm trying to help them transcend the banal, the everyday.

Now you're skivvin' into magic. Okay, let me summarize. You got a but.

A but. I also know that they'll see it on a pretty strict guide. They'll see the result and know that that was a success or a failure, I will necessarily know that there was that. I occasionally get a real meta experience with my athlete, but not very often.

Okay, so let's tidy this up.

That's why I do it.

We're focused on ingredients, and I wanted to get that out of the gate, the idea of success, because obviously it's sometimes better to understand your end focus so that you can understand what the ingredients are to get there. So both of you have described, I mean, Chris, I heard achievement, and then I heard you deepen your discussion and understanding of it. It was very cool. And then that started to get into the idea of we don't even, we don't technically know as the coachee, as the person being coached, what is achievement? And that's why the alchemy of coaching to me is that bringing together of two people to solve one problem. It's pretty darn exciting. And then Steve, I forwarded to you, and you indicated, which I'm sure Chris would agree, there's a lot of different viewpoints of what success is in any endeavor. Running, I've seen it over 10 years. Sometimes it's a PR, sometimes it's just teamwork with great friends running in the morning. Sometimes it's just getting up. So I heard about success and fail, and I heard that. So let's now delve in, either one chime in. I'd like you to chop quicker this time what the ingredients are. So I wanna hear kind of one ingredient from Steve, one from Chris. Let's go like a tennis match. Steve, you go. What's an ingredient?

Commitment.

Commitment. What do you got, Chris?

Physical training.

Physical training, commitment. What do you got, Steve?

Coachability, ability to listen and to be in tune with allowing the coach to do their, to fulfill their role.

Nice. What do you got, Chris?

Focus.

Focus.

Ability to suffer.

Suffer.

This is interesting. Well, you need a team, accountability.

Accountability. You snuck in too.

They're related.

I would say staying injury free.

Yeah, health.

Health.

Let's see. Motivation.

Yeah, motivation.

An end. An athlete needs to see an end to it. For example, not gonna go too far on examples, but so many are process driven initially, and you almost have to push them out of process, get them into end result so that you can get back to process. So it's nice to see them go for an end and then you can work through.

And let me twist this question about ingredients now and ask you Chris, when you first meet a new coaching client, running client, what are you understanding are the ingredients that person needs? Are you going through a checklist? Are you taking a holistic view? Are you breaking it down? Who is this person and what are they capable of? What ingredients have they brought to this coaching engagement?

So those conversations for me start with some version of purpose, at least as they can articulate it, which kind of gets to the motivation point. I want to understand why they're doing it. Why did you come to me? What's your history with the sport? And why do you continue to do it?

And in their answering that why, they give you some of the ingredients they come to you with?

Yeah, because then for me, I can understand what, where they're coming from, their perspective, you know, as I've talked about before on this podcast, I coach the individual, and if you don't understand the individual perspective, then you can't help them achieve those goals that we talked about. So that's where I start, is why are you here?

Yeah, where do you start, Steve?

I start by ignoring, and I start by trying to figure out how full of shit they are.

Help us understand the ignore part of that component.

So it's well known that to be a member of my group, you pretty much have to go through a two week where I say to you, talk to the people on the team, don't talk to me. If you've got a major issue, if you've got a major thing, I don't want to be responsible for an injury or you suddenly ramping your mileage up by a 300% in a short window. But I like my athletes to help my new athlete figure out where they are. Because I know they're not trustworthy, the athlete doesn't understand that they're not trustworthy at that point. And so my own athletes, their interaction with my athletes allows me to see where they are on that continuum of bullshit.

And we're getting nods from Chris and laughter. I don't know if it's laughter agreement.

Well, I'm laughing because he uses me. This is where me running in the group is a tool.

You are my key assistant, but I do have multiple assistants.

I'm one of many assistants that he kind of gets to assimilate.

The fifth column of Steve's assistant coaching. Okay, so let's think about that, though, because it's really interesting. If I'm a runner and I'm getting coached and I'm starting to hear on this podcast that actually I don't even know my ingredients, is that what we're saying? Or help me understand this a little bit more. Does the runner themselves know the ingredients they come with?

I don't think so. I mean, I think they think they know. I mean, and sometimes, I would agree. I mean, and sometimes maybe they have a clue about a few things, but I think largely they're coming to us because they recognize that they don't know and they need help. You know, the athlete that shows up thinking they know tends to not stay very long because they want to do it their way. I think this is also-

Can you say that again? That was a really good point.

Well, the athlete, the things they know doesn't stay very long because they think, you know, they think that they have it all figured out so they don't need us. And so by the time they get to us, usually they're fairly malleable. And this is part of the reason why Steve ignores them initially is because he wants to sort out the real from the fake, you know, the ones that are going to stick around and recognize that this is the place where they can learn versus the ones that are going to fade away after two weeks because...

So I want Steve to go now because you got a thought on that.

Well, yeah, I do. I think it's really important. Just so that people don't think that Rogue is about putting people into deep water and letting them sink. Team Rogue is the highest level of the grouping we have at Rogue. So Chris coaches athletes at a much more beginner level. The athletes that come to me are at a more advanced level. And so that ignoring is not dangerous. It could be dangerous to the relationship, but it's not dangerous to the athlete. I just want to make that clear.

Sure. And as a matter of fact, let's now listen. If you want, use examples. Don't name names per se, but use examples of... Well, I'm going to go on this one. People... You know, most of the listeners maybe aren't at the elite level, but they're listening because they want to know what their ingredients are. So, help us focus in on this again. Now, we already listed them kind of in broad terms, but go over some people who you felt like, if you reflect, you had a situation where they didn't seem to know the ingredients they brought to you, and you all tapped in on it, and then they had amazing success because you helped them understand the raw stuff they have.

So, I'll give a good example. So, this athlete came to me, it would be about three years ago now. He had run the Austin Half Marathon in about two hours, and he said he wanted to do a fall half marathon, and this was, he came to me in March or April, he said, I'm doing a race in October, and I want to beat my time from Austin, I want to run faster than two hours. And so, I said, okay, great, you know, but I was meeting this gentleman for the first time, and asked him the questions I usually ask, like I mentioned, why are you doing this? What do you want from it? What has your training been like? So I know where his starting point was. And usually in those situations, people want to jump to a goal and say, okay, I want to break two hours, I want to hang my hat on that. And I usually tell them, why? Let's just wait, you know, let's figure out, once we add this new process to your training, let's wait and see where you end up. And so, with him, he was stubborn, and so we had to work through some stubbornness, but willing to do what I told him to do. And so, once I got him focused on the process, which for him meant slowing down a little bit, probably a lot, being consistent, doing all the work associated with our training, and then layering in sort of the speed stuff he hadn't really been getting when he was training on his own, he went, by the time we got around to his race in September, October, we were talking about breaking 90 minutes. So he went from two hours to breaking 90 minutes. He ran, in his race, he ran 129. Perfectly executed race because he was willing to listen, sort of set aside his ego and stubbornness, and because he had all the physical tools. The talent was there, but he had just never, one, kind of gotten the right process, or two, been able to set his ego aside and stubbornness aside enough to kind of let the process work.

Beautiful, great example. So I heard a lot about willingness, and the will defines that gentleman's success. Awesome. Steve, what about you? You have an example similar, kind of where somebody's ingredients really started shining.

I do. Again, one thing, a little caveat I'll say is, women are significantly easier to coach than men from the outset.

For you.

No, for all.

For all?

I think Chris was right.

I think that's generally true.

Because the women are already in a position where they recognize their need, and men, to get to us by the time they've gotten to us, they've only, many of them have only begrudgingly felt that way.

So from a gender perspective, need is another ingredient. Women seem to have it better and more present than men.

Well, they're just more willing to ask for help, I think, is generally it.

They're more willing to pay for it too, in a sense. And the threshold's not great at Rogue, but it is a threshold.

And by the way, that doesn't make them weak. That makes them strong.

Absolutely.

Because the men have too much ego. I mean, this is a generalization. Obviously, there are people, men that recognize they need help and are willing to set their ego aside. But generally, our programming is 65 to 70% women. Largely, we hypothesize because they're willing to set their ego aside, ask for help, and really use that as a form of strength.

Fair enough, so Steve's talking.

My male, I'm gonna use another male example because I think that it's so easy to get crystal clear on them. I have an athlete that came to me about two, two and a half years ago, someone who Chris has heavily assistant coached in this endeavor. His work is exceedingly high level. He's a dermatologist at a high, high level. He's a really good doctor. And he came to us performing well, but not performing to what he was capable of. He had an idea of what he thought he was capable of, and we found, in much like Chris' case, he's definitely better than that. And I knew that, and I think Chris knew that as well. This athlete was going to run really fast, and we're not even close to, to this day, we're not close to even figuring out how fast he could run. But he brought excuses to the table that were really legitimate excuses. His wife travels a good bit. He's got a very high level, busy work job, and his family, his children are super important to him. And he is, he is a absolute badass in every single thing he does. But yet he wanted to be a good runner. But he wasn't willing to bring the badass to his running because he was going to give up that part of himself. And it took about a year and a half, maybe two years. And I think the group environment, the other people who worked with him, then him recognizing in his own self, the talent level that he had, that he began to realize that selfishness was essential in a very small dose, in a small enough dose. And then his other skill sets just came to bear. I mean, his ability to stay focused, his ability to go for a goal. I mean, if you've been through medical school, you've done all these things. He's in a great relationship with his wife, great relationship with his children. All the attributes, his natural raw ingredients were going to make him a stellar runner. And now he just finds the right balance, and it changes and adjusts. But it was incredibly motivating to see that change in him that was already there. So it was a wrong reading he currently had, but no one could have convinced him. If we had said in advance, you're not being selfish enough, he would have kicked us out the door and never given us an opportunity. And now I don't know that, we've never talked about that, but...

I'm gonna do a wordsmithing and say, instead of selfish, which I think we all understand what that implies, self-full. He understood, he can love his own journey, and he can honor it and give it more time. Lovely. So let me wrap this up.

Go ahead, Chris.

One thing I wanna add to this conversation is that a lot of times people come to us and don't understand what ingredients they bring to the team.

Bingo.

And that's kind of what Steve was getting to with that example.

You got the same way.

But there's so many times that's true. And whether it's somebody who's just stubborn as kind of the examples we've given, or people that just haven't seen it. I have a lot of runners in my group, because again, it's more beginner, intermediate, that come to us as new athletes, meaning they didn't do sports growing up. They got into running later in life, and they found it as a way to move, a movement practice that we talked about offline. And it's uncovering things for them that they didn't think were possible. And so oftentimes, they come to us sort of self-deprecating. Like, I can't do this, or I'm not sure what I can do, because I have never proven it to myself. And part of what our job is, is to unlock that. I had a woman in my group tell me, I never thought of myself as an athlete before joining this group. And now she thinks of herself as an athlete, which completely changes the perspective on what she can accomplish.

So it's really interesting, so let me just wrap up ingredients. I mean, obviously we could go on for a whole day, but I would offer and say, I had a hunch that you might say things like, great ability to have a sinewy body, or great ability to have the wherewithal to get the right equipment. But what we heard instead is a lot more about the stuff inside, the stuff upstairs. And motivations, willingness, being self-full, as Steve pointed out, this fella really deserved to give a little bit more to himself, and when he did that, he started to hit the breakthroughs. So from ingredients, I'm sure some of the listeners may want to kind of explore that idea, but in coaching, I think the coach's unique ability to leverage the ingredients unknown to the coachee, to the person you're coaching, that's something very, that's a big gift, and you all have obviously both shared it. You guys got comments before we move on to the next section.

I have one, and that's that in my case, I guess it's maybe basically somewhere in the range of 25 years of coaching experience, I've come to realize that a lot of times I don't even know what they are either. And I think at first that was something that I really felt self-conscious about, but because I've sort of just taken on the role of intuitive coach, sort of, I just let it happen. But I do know in the case that I gave, the example that I gave.

Let the ingredients come out, meaning?

It was really obvious that this was a high performer person, and yet his results were low, were not as good as what he was capable of, both what you could tell physiologically and the gifts he was given, and his skill sets that he had developed.

Sure.

That I could tell pretty quickly, but I didn't know exactly how they would play out or how quickly they would go, so I had to stay flexible enough to say, well, is this real ingredient, a real ingredient in this individual, or is this just sort of a natural tendency? And in this case, this person, it is a real ingredient that they've worked themselves rather than some natural tendency, because some natural tendencies are really hard to break through. They're like limiters, because a person will not either be balanced enough to look at both sides of the issue or the multiple sides of the issue, or because it's so natural, they're not even conscious of it as a strength or a weakness, as the case may be. So I also think it's important for intuition to play through. As I watch Chris and his coaching, to be a great coach, everyone must, you must become intuitive, and Chris' strengths now are lending far as much or more towards his intuitive nature, which is very different from my intuitive nature, but very much so. And now it's like to me, I look at it and say, there's a great coach, that they're able to allow the athlete to morph and change, and they'll be able to see what they need to see when they see it, without grabbing ahold of it and making it happen.

That's some of the alchemy, and you're referencing intuition, which is a magic word. So we're gonna focus on that more, obviously, in the magic section. Chris, you have some thoughts.

The only thing I will add before we go is that it's coach-athlete for sure, and that partnership is important to understand what ingredients the athlete can bring to bear. But the group is so powerful as well, and this environment at Rogue, you can't talk about this stuff without mentioning that, because iron sharpens iron in our worlds. And for the most part, Steve and I get little windows with our athletes. It might be a little conversation at a water station or between intervals, but they're spending most of the time with their fellow runners, and the ability for them to look side by side and run and learn from each other is just as powerful, I think.

Fantastic summary sentence there, Chris. And I would offer, just before we move on, the idea of the alchemy of coaching doesn't necessarily imply only coach and the person he or she is coaching. It is absolutely the community around that person getting coached. And the coach can be a facilitator and can be an inviter to just really going deep, like you all have already mentioned. So in this alchemy journey, we're now at the point where we're gonna talk about science, something I think, from my view as an outsider of what Rogue is up to, it's been the most fascinating thing to see, that your dedication and care to the human body and how it moves through space, how it does short runs and how it more importantly, oftentimes in your all's case, does long runs. How about, I anticipate, I spoke earlier with Chris about this, I understand you have more of a bent towards the science than Steve, I know both of you are masters of it. I'd love to have Chris just kind of ponder, if you would, a little bit, when a coaching client first arrives in the Rogue space, what are they thinking in terms of running as science, as something that can benefit from what we now know about the human body in space?

Sure. I mean, most people come to us and they think, I'm gonna go to Rogue to run fast. I need to run faster to get faster. But it's a lot more complicated than that, as we've talked about in this podcast. And for most people, as they join us, Steve will use the terminology that they join us as aerobic babies, meaning their aerobic system is infantile. But because he can't embolden.

I apologize, can you just explain a little more? That's pretty funny. Maybe Steve chime in real quick or something.

I actually usually use a less appropriate term, but I'll let Chris stay with his analogy.

Aerobic baby has like, that's just.

Well, I mean, you've used both, but yes. Depending on the context.

I'm moving towards baby, so we'll just stay there.

Steve will use less politically correct terminology, too. But the analogy is more or less the same, which is that they're new to the sport. And when you're new to a sport, your skills are.

Do you include people that were self-training before they got to you? It depends, it depends.

I mean, it depends. I mean, if they've been training for a couple of years by themselves, it's probably still likely that they're aerobic babies. But their history as an athlete matters. I get some people that come to me and they played soccer growing up, and that obviously means they've gotten some aerobic development. Or swimmers oftentimes get into running later in life, and obviously they've had some significant aerobic development. So it varies, but for the most part, they come to us as aerobic infants, which means their aerobic system is new. And it takes years to develop your aerobic system, and I have to explain people frequently that what we're talking about isn't fake. It's not like we're making up something, or this isn't an analogy we're talking about. It's like your aerobic system, meaning your mitochondria in your cells, your blood vessels in your muscles, your blood's ability to carry oxygen, your lung's ability to process oxygen. Those things are infantile, meaning they're not very good when you start running, and you have to train your body and also allow it to evolve so that those things develop. So we're literally trying to train people so that their insides change. And most people don't really understand that. We're talking about adding mitochondria to their cells. We're talking about adding blood vessels to their muscles, capillaries. Talking about improving their blood's ability to carry oxygen and improve their lung's ability to process oxygen into their bloodstream. We're talking about physical changes like you would have physical changes, weight lifting.

But you can't see them.

And what's the practical? How does Rogue convey that in a practical sort of process sense?

Honestly, I don't think we really do very much. I think we... It is so... The way that the human body works is a confusing thing to discuss. It's not a simple equation. And so, when we do try to talk about it, people get confused. So what we just say to them is... And everybody wants the sexy, right? They want the hard, quality workouts. And so, we're a business, right? And so, we have to go about providing them what they want. But what we do that's a little bit different is we're not afraid of letting them see what they don't have. And allowing them to crash on the beach occasionally rather than moving their boat right up onto the beach. Because they have to fail a little bit to see, and then they'll come back to us and say, why, why, why? And we can tell them.

Help pin that on the science, maybe. What are we talking about scientifically? What's happening? What does fail mean scientifically for a runner, for example?

Well, there's different layers of it. But for the most part, what happens is people come here as aerobic babies. And one of two things happens. One, they go too fast, which means that they're not developing their aerobic system in the right way. To use a car analogy, which I often use im with my athletes, when you're building the aerobic system, you're expanding the engine, you're adding cylinders. When you're working fast, you're fine-tuning the engine. So for the most part, they show up and they're going too fast. So they're fine-tuning a really tiny engine, and they're revving it up like, you know, they get a really revved up lawnmower engine. And what happens then is that either, as a result, they don't quite get the result that they want because they've got a tiny little revved up engine, not the big V6 or V8 or 10-cylinder that we want. Or, you know, they develop fairly quickly because some training, any training, is gonna cause some development in the aerobic system, but their chassis isn't ready. Staying with the car analogy, their chassis, their neuromuscular system isn't ready for that development because the aerobic system tends to develop faster than the neuromuscular side of things, and they get hurt. And so if you don't do it the right way, then they crash on the beach, like Steve said, which then allows us to kind of come back in and say, all right, now let's figure out how to do this the right way.

Right, if they were stubborn, or if they knew they had a need, if they were perhaps what we said earlier, a gender difference. Maybe a woman says, I know I have a need, I know I'm an aerobic baby. How are you guiding them as a coach scientifically to that process? Why would she get a bigger, why would she get so much more competence through the coaching process?

Because we put the bit and bridle on them. We back them off. We make them, the physiological attributes that Chris is discussing take extended periods of time to develop. And because no one can see it, race results are the key way to tell whether that is achieved. And so what we do, boots on the ground, is we actually require people to set goal times, and they think it's because we're trying to get their heads right, but it's more to try to let them see that they're not physically capable necessarily of doing what they want. If Chris' analogy of his person that wanted to run under two hours had instead wanted to run under 90 minutes and wasn't ready, we would have seen them crash and burn in workouts before they crashed and burned in the race, and our coaches would then have been able to say, well, let's see what it is. And there it's a massaging them back from the goal that they have and try to work that through. But we do make them run a time trial within two to three weeks of any program that you're in Rogue. Now, the advanced level programs don't do that, but all of our other programs do that. We ask them to run a two-mile time trial. It's always the same. All rogues hate doing it. It's painful, it's suffering, and it also forces many people who have been with us for a long time to sort of face up to the fact that they're not where they used to be or where they want to be. But it allows us to say, okay, use that time right now. And anybody in the science of marathoning would tell you a two-mile time trial is not indicative of where they're going to be. But we gotta pin a tail somewhere. We gotta say they're in some kind of shape. So we use that for some really scientific physiological reasons why that distance is valuable, rather than a mile or three miles. There's real science to why you pick two miles. And then they're able to take that time, plug it into a couple calculators, and then know when we say we're gonna do 10K pace work, which is a real developing some physiological attributes, that they run at that pace. If they run half marathon pace, they run at that pace. And so that's really where I think Rogue is a real difference in many other programming, is that we require them quickly to pay attention to the science of it. And some of them don't. Some people in some groups, they really don't. But others, when they do, especially if they've got an inclination going that direction, they've got some real things that they can really work on.

Got it. So, what I got, and I'd like to hear from you too, Chris, but what I'm getting so far is this idea that although this science is very critical and you all have really managed it and become adept at it over the years of dedication to coaching, the alchemy of coaching is you don't necessarily tell the coaching the runner. You're basically showing them through the trend over time of how their time is, how their body's adjusting, and how improvement is happening. And that they're losing, they're getting into their teenage years of their aerobic system.

One thing I've learned as a coach since I started coaching in Rogue in 2010, is that you can explain all of that to an athlete up front, but it's almost impossible for them to get it or really internalize it until they have practical application in front of them of living the process. And so, and I typically still do try to explain it, but often times gonna have to rehash it frequently because it's not intuitive. I think that's the thing. You know, if you think about, I wanna run faster, you think, well, I have to run fast all the time to run faster, right? And a lot of people show up and maybe they're running a three mile loop or four mile loop around their house, and they think if I just run it a little bit faster every time I do that loop, I'll get faster in the long term. When the truth is, you're probably not. You're probably gonna get hurt at some point. You're probably gonna reach a plateau because you're basically working the same part of your aerobic system all the time. And all we do is work different parts at different times to give them the optimal aerobic development.

So this is great. I wanna stick with science because I hope y'all have at least one or two other nuggets, but the biggest nugget I just heard, and I haven't heard this before, is the development of the aerobic system is gonna get you your PR, ultimately.

It's the crucial piece.

Nice. I'd like to hear some more science, y'all, just before we move on to it.

I've got something for you. There's also another thing, and there's theoretical science and practical science. Rogue was built initially on a theoretical science platform, basically because I'm the guy who started it. I'm the guy who-

I'm explaining what you mean by that, theoretical.

So theoretical means what an ivory tower would tell you, what a book might tell you, what happens to the body physiologically to gain the physiological skill sets necessary to get better.

And it sounds like over time, you veered towards practical.

No, we have learned that the theoretical is purely that, and that we have to test it practically.

The only difference between theory and practice.

Is right. And so sometimes we'll have really smart people come to us who are exercise physiologists. We actually had a fantastic coach here in Jeff Knight, who is so well versed in the physiology of it. And I think initially his real learning curve was that, okay, I got to get out of what the book says and see what's actually happening in my athlete. And believe me, Rogue has gone through many, many years of guinea pigging with athletes. Typically our fastest athletes we've guinea pigged with. But the methods that we use, I think sometimes some of the training protocols that we've implemented at Rogue may not actually theoretically be what someone would consider optimal. But our experience is that over basically 15 years of implementation, we're able to see that these things should be happening. Some things are, some things aren't. And why is that? You're dealing with an older population. You're dealing with folks who are not. A lot of the testing that's done in exercise physiology is done on the fastest and the young and the fast.

So let's hear some more science then. What are some breakthroughs y'all have had? Steve, you've had a lot of years dedicated to Rogue now. What are some of the scientific breakthroughs that really excite you, that you share with your runners?

So one thing that we've realized is that we were basing a lot of things on an attitude of progression through what we call macro cycles. So a periodization plan that was start with slower, move to faster. And we realized pretty quickly through watching the results that we were seeing at the world level, at the fastest athletes, that many of them were starting to do some faster paced running early in the cycle. And they were sort of setting up a little bit of a, that physiologically what was happening was they were loading those neuro muscular, getting the neuro muscular recruitment early that they could touch base with later. Because when you build a cycle for an athlete scientifically to build over time, sometimes they don't have the skill set later to go as fast as you want. And so what would happen is that we would see athletes getting hurt late in the cycle, trying to figure out why was that happening. Well, we hadn't loaded them appropriately early on. And we were watching, why are athletes in the beginning of their cycle when they're supposed to be in the base phase doing 5K pace work and faster? Well, science was telling us that we needed to load those, get that neuro muscular recruitment, stay with it just a little bit throughout the cycle, and then hit it late, and then we would get the result.

So you got to challenge the baby.

Yes, well, we needed to add new load. We had to add loads, and so we learned that, again, one of the founding principles of all of Rogue to start with was elite level training protocols implemented on the everyday runner, and we have never been led astray by that. It is still counterintuitive. People still fight with us about that, and we are unapologetic, absolutely 100% confident because we have spent 15 years seeing it play out.

Yeah, great. What do you got, Chris?

The other thing I would add is that some of the workouts that we do, especially in the context of our long runs, physiologically, you would probably say they're not necessary, or theoretically, as Steve was mentioning, but what we've learned is that you have to harden the mind and give people the opportunity to find their zone, so to speak, when it comes to marathon training. So we do a fair amount of marathon goal pace work, as well as sometimes faster than that work within the context of long runs. We do less of it for our intermediate athlete and more for our more advanced athlete, but physiologically, it's probably not necessary. But we found that people wouldn't get the results if they didn't have it, because they hadn't had the opportunity to practice it and harden their mind to it when they showed up on race day and weren't quite ready to kind of carry that through the whole race.

So we're tapping into this idea of y'all have backed what you say. You are supporting the Rogue process with a lot of science, a lot of understanding, and a lot of practical application of a theoretical start that you really wanted excellence in your runners.

And continued tweaking. I mean, I think that that's something that we will never get credit for, but we do all the time. We brought Jeff Knight in to test this physiologically, scientifically test the basic theories we had. And Jeff did test them, and he came out the other side saying, okay, we need to add this and we need to add this. And we're always adjusting and always trying to say, let's stay on the cutting edge of what's going on scientifically. Not necessarily what's happening again in the exercise physiology departments at all these major schools, but more what are the elite athletes doing? Because that's the practical, we're seeing some practical application that came through that. And we bad mouth Alberto Salazar all the time, but one thing Alberto Salazar is doing is putting a lot of people through tests on treadmills and finding out what the body can do. And so then you see those race results played out by his athletes, and then all of us are going back and sort of reverse engineering what happened in that process. Some coaches give you more insight on what they actually physically do. Others, you have to try to extrapolate or interview or find ways to figure it out. But I do think that that's one thing that we... To toot our own horn, we are not... People think we're getting people fast, and it's just running them through a gauntlet. And if you squeeze enough grapes, you're going to make wine. And that's not what we're doing. Unfortunately, in order to get wine, you do have to squeeze grapes, and things break. And that will happen. I used to be so, so frustrated that we would hurt athletes. And then someone made me realize, well, how in the world are you ever going to get somebody to perform at a high level if they're not stressing their body? There's always a razor's edge that you're at there. And how do you step two steps back from getting them over that edge? You know, at the end of the day, Kevin, science, the science piece is all about another quote that Rogue uses all the time, which is what does the race require? And physiologically, to allow a runner to run 20 miles and then do quality work that will simulate what happens over the last six miles of a marathon is completely, it's so dangerous, it's like it's malpractice. And I see it happen. We see it happen in other programs where they do that. And so what we do is all the time, how do we get an athlete into the same physiological slash psychological space where they'll have to work through serious, serious, serious problems and through serious shit to get the result that they want. We do it from, these are two, I'll give you two workouts that are indicative of this. We do one workout where we make them run, many coaches use this cycle where they go half marathon pace, 10K pace, half marathon pace, 10K pace, and they do it over a period of time early in a run, and then they get a little break, and then late in the run, they make them go back to marathon pace so that they've got beat up legs and they're tired and they're not, they're feeling at 12 miles or 14 miles or 16 miles, physiologically the way they would feel at 22 miles. And then we have them go to two to three to four miles that will be like what they're gonna go through in a race. So that's one thing we do. Another thing we do that I do, but not many, we don't really have this as a rogue protocol, but my advanced level runners do it. We just did it two weeks ago. We do four times 400 meters, which is one lap around the track, which is a quarter of a mile, which I can't do the math, Chris probably can, but how much less of a marathon that is. We do four of them, right, which would equal a mile. So it's, and then I say, and at the end of that last, they're doing it all out with full recovery. The workout is like total workout time, total workout distance with warm up and cool down and everything is probably five, six miles at most. And it all one mile. But that last lap, that final 400, they are physiologically dealing with extremely similar experiences that they'll be dealing with in a marathon. And there is no book telling you that, or coach out there telling you that physiologically, this is the reason you're doing it. But we're saying, what will the race require? My athletes are gonna have to deal with junk in the trunk, right? Legs that are heavy as lead, but that's not firing, calves that are shot. My brain is not processing. And if I lactate dump them as quick and as possibly as fast as I can, I'm gonna get a simulated effect. That simulated effect hopefully will allow them to feel confident when they're in stress. Because that's what happens. They're in stress and they have to be confident when they're in stress. And that's so hard to teach people.

There's a great tip off between the science where I'd like us to close out and into the magic. And both of you, I wanna hear both of your views on the magic of this coaching alchemy. But what I'd like to just summarize where we've been. So we started out with the idea of what is success. And we heard some things about success is achievement. Success is this sort of moving target for each individual and finding out what that individual means by their running experience is super important to you all as coaches. Then we moved into the ingredients that make that happen. The why, why are you doing this? That's where Chris, you found the ingredients started to become manifest even though the individual may not know it, Steve, you concurred. They come with a lot of bullshit about running faster, but the ingredients that will get them there are a self-full appreciation that it's okay to give themselves more time in their schedule. So then we moved into this idea of science and it was fascinating for me. I haven't really heard some of that before, but that you all keep it quiet because it's just developed over time. And I think the biggest thing I took from that is that you trend each of your runners' results. It's very important for you as the coach in the alchemy you're creating with your runner to trend their results over time. And you are very careful about where they are in their program. And that was fantastic to hear. But we're starting to get to something I do have a lot of experience with is the little monkey upstairs. The situation the runner faces where, and from the runners that I know, I know one that faces a lot of demons up there that block the opportunity. So I'd like to just to kick off magic and start with you a little bit, Steve. How do you help your runners manage that little talker up in the head? What's going on there?

The way I do it is I beat them up. Chris is laughing. I didn't get a chance to coach this athlete because when I coached at the University of Texas, I coached women, not men. But I was always jealous of certain athletes that I would see. Every coach looks at athletes that are super talented and have a matrix of talent level, but they're missing one little component. Because most people at the super elite level are just missing one little thing. And this one athlete, I knew exactly what it was. And what it was was he needed to get put in a cage and he needed to get poked with a stick. Because the rage wouldn't come out appropriately. He was a rageful person who got into lots of fights. He did really poorly behave, but it wouldn't come out when it needed to. And the coach that he had at the time is a master of psychological manipulation and really got a lot out of this athlete. But I always thought there was just one more thing that he could do. And so I don't do this to every single athlete, but I do think frequently what I try to do is to put them into significant distress, physiologically or psychologically, to see how they'll respond. And then that allows you to sort of push their strengths and weakness matrix. And I think this is some of the biggest part of the magic is knowing the strengths and weaknesses that your athletes have, working the strengths early, I mean, working the weaknesses early, working the strengths late. So early on, because we usually plan things out in six months or four month windows, because we're talking about marathoners. And so we try to work, psychologically, I try to work with what they're good, what they're bad at early, because they're way more willing to do it. This is why I also tell people I need 18 months. I mean, when I start working with an athlete, every single one of them hears, if you're not going to give me 18 months, you're not going to get the full benefit. Not one, because we know physiologically they won't get the benefit, but number two, I won't know how to poke them. And in order to poke them with a stick appropriately, I have to, because that's very few people, male or female, very few people respond to the carrot. The stick is way more important than the carrot when you are trying to do a physiological task because the brain gets in the way, it jumps in the way, and if you can poke the bear, if you can stick them a little bit, they'll go, oh, whoa, whoa, what just happened? And you'll get a change in response.

So this is a little different, what you're saying than what they say, what is fairly standard in the field of performance in the workplace, which is play to your strengths. That's a pretty common reference. And what you're indicating here, Steve, is part of the magic is poking the weakness early on, just really delving into, is it real or not?

And then play to the strength, because you will not have, I say, healthy, happy, strong. I mean, you have got to be happy. You've got to get a good starting line experience, which is our main goal as coaches, to get them on the starting line, ready to roll. You want to go back to their strengths later on, but you have to have shown them that they have the ability to overcome their weaknesses, because athletes are always, human beings do not want to test the edges. Even those athletes who are skillful at testing edges, still don't want to do it. And that's the coach's role, honestly, in my view, is to push, find the blind spots, make sure they see where they're at in their blind spots, push it, push it, push it, and then go back to what they're really, really good at. And then the nice thing about our sport is that, it really does lend itself to that in a lot of ways. It's like just naturally what, how the periodization science of our sport really works. We don't make them run really, really fast at the end of a cycle. We actually try to make them run slower and a little bit longer, and we freshen them up right at the end. So it kind of allows us to kind of play through that as a narrative, if you will, in their short cycle of a marathon prep or in the longer cycle of a career arc. But that's what I do. I really try to push and prod and poke to appropriately get a response that allows me to do my job better, because stress is a great indicator of how people will react in the world.

Great, so you wield your magic, Steve, with the idea of a stick is greater than a carrot and that it deserves to be poked in the right place at the right time.

And culturally, we have a really, I mean, I think that if I were raising a child, I'd be thrown in jail, right? But we do have a sort of an understanding that, Nobody puts the aerobic baby in the corner. The Vince Lombardi idea of tough love and tough, you know, about that idea that it's gonna be hard, it's gonna be tough. There's still a substantial amount of the American public, at least, that is expecting that from a coach, and they want that. And I think that in some ways, that's where Chris is challenged more than I am, because I don't think it's as natural for him to go there with his athletes. He does in a different way. I go there quickly by just saying, Hey, I've got an excuse. Coaches are always supposed to push their athlete to the edge. You know, and so I just do it, because it so much more quickly shows what the athlete's capable of and what they're going to be able to do.

Well, let's hear from Chris. Chris, what do you got on this?

Well, I definitely do it differently.

Yeah, let's hear your magic.

And it's ironic that I'm coached by Steve. But for me, my magic is not magical. There's a famous quote from the book Running with the Buffaloes, which we talked about on our podcast with Kara and Adam Goucher. From Mark Wetmore, who's the coach at University of Colorado, distance coach, famous in our sport. For coaching Olympians down to collegiate national champions. And he said in that book, there are no miracles in running. There might be miracles in other sports, but there aren't in running. And his magic with his athletes was being able to tell them what they could run in a given meet, to the point where they believed it because he was right. And so for me, it's more along those lines where my spidey sense as a coach is having an ability to know where an athlete is and what they can accomplish, telling them they can accomplish it, and then making it so matter of fact that it's gonna happen that they don't have a chance to not believe me, and then they just go do it.

So you're building the structure around and showing them after workout, after workout, after workout, that what you think they're capable of.

Exactly, so my process is almost like where Steve might talk about a hard workout and kind of throw it in your face and build it up and make you almost scared of it to draw out some response. I would do the opposite and be like, look, this is no big deal. I wouldn't give you anything more than you can't handle. Just go do it. To the point where they do it, and then they believe.

But what happens with the listener that's not getting there, that you're applying the magic and the magic isn't working?

Well, that's harder because sometimes I'm wrong. Sometimes you get people that are afraid of pain we talked about in our last podcast, episode 32, where we talked about the fear of pain. And some people, especially new athletes to the sport, don't really understand what hurting should feel like. I've had people ask me, what should I, like how hard should it be? And so there, you have to just lead them more slowly through the process. Just like give them a little bit to push them into the dark spaces so that they learn they didn't die and then do it again. So it's just a longer process. In that sense for me, Steve would probably just throw them in the deep end.

I do have a tendency to do that, but what Chris, what people don't realize is as soon as I throw them in the deep end, they don't drown. They moan, many of them start to swim, and then they think they did it and I'm the asshole, right? And at the end of the day, it doesn't work that all the way, but that's one of the reasons why I kind of sort of really test my athletes before I throw that method at them necessarily. One of the thing that you just said, we talk about it all the time in running is when they hit a plateau, like why is this not happening, right? Why is that, why are we not seeing a result? You're friends with an athlete that runs in Rogue who is currently in a long plateau phase, who I've spoken to one or two times about psychological pieces, and she nods her head and she says, I hear you, and yes, she gleaned some things from those conversations. In my view at this point in time, she ran with Rogue, she's run with Rogue for a long time, she took a little break where she didn't run with Rogue, then she came back to Rogue. Sometimes it's just a plateau. Sometimes it's just time. And one of the other magic things is, this is amazing, is the science of it always works.

Say what you mean by that.

If the athlete will give it time, they will aerobically develop. If they aerobically develop, they will move beyond the plateau at which they're at. And so they just are in a, many times they're in a window of, well, they all think they're in a mental funk, but what they're in is just their body's gonna take, it's just they got really good for a window of time, or they were behind the eight ball pretty far, and they were more of an aerobic infant than they knew, or there's a lot of different reasons why those things happen. And again, so my analogy of poking the bear, poking them with a stick, sometimes you're just making them mad, and there's nothing else to do. And I think Chris and I both know the time when that's happening. And I'll go back and say, in my own mind, I'll say, that's a plateau. Now I'll tell you, the athlete, they don't want to hear that. That's the last thing they want to hear. They think you're lying to them. Number one, they think you're lying to them because that's not what they've seen played out with the other athletes. So if they started, so five runners could start together, and they could all start at four hours and they could all end up at three hours for a marathon, but they're all going to reach that three hour time at a different time. And so everyone thinks that there are science experiment that's just going to work out just like just point A will happen in this amount of time, point B will happen in this amount of time, and that does not happen. It happens when the body decides to make it happen or when the universe decides if you want to go magic, which I do sometimes say. But I do know that that's physiological. It just takes time sometimes. And some of those things are physiological. In my experience, the vast majority of them are psychological, but if an athlete has been with Rogue or an inner training program for two years or three years and they quit improving, it is almost always going to be that they're just in a plateau phase that just takes time to work through.

The question I want to get to here, though, is because this is where I think Steve and I, I wouldn't say disagree, that's a strong word, but where I question Steve on the question of magic is if an athlete goes into a race and they're prepared to run X, physically, they've done the training that proves they can run X. He is a coach that believes that there's a Y, somewhere above X or faster than X, that they can get to if they tap into magic, if they kind of transcend, if they have the ability to transcend what paper or math or science would tell them they could do. And there's a gap in there. And so that's the magic he often talks about, which I don't necessarily believe in.

Why not?

Because like I said, my approach is you train for what you can do. And so you should go into a race knowing exactly what you can accomplish.

Isn't there a risky, isn't there a risky, that's just safe, right? I mean, if I just train for what I can do, isn't that safe?

No, because it's different, because any marathon, so any marathon you run, let's say you're trying to run three hours and 30 minutes, and that's a peak of what you can accomplish. There's risk associated with that. I always tell my athletes, like, the faster you try to go, the more risk you're taking on with the marathon, and less likely that you're going to be able to accomplish it. And so you have to just deal with more risk. So to me, it's more of a risk-reward equation. You know, the harder you press that edge, the more risk that you don't get it or that something comes up that, but it doesn't mean you can't accomplish it physically. It doesn't mean you're not physically trained for it. But I think Steve's perspective is slightly different, which is that, you know, there's something above risk. There's something that transcends that. And look, he's my coach. So at some level, I understand where he's coming.

What does he think that is?

We do think about that differently.

What is that above risk, Steve?

If I hadn't seen, so I came at, I think I've always been partial and wanted to believe in this difference as Chris' analogy, X is the level at which the athlete trains for. And I'll ask an athlete sometimes to train at that level and then say, but I think we can get Y. Now, frequently, that almost always, I allow my athlete to bring that to me. I rarely will say, you should go to Y. Here's where you're at, and we should expect better than that. I have to have complicity before…

You're not telling them you're asking them.

No, they need to bring it to me in order that they want to get there. What I'll tell them, Chris has heard me say this, and I think he thinks this is where maybe I'm being a bit irresponsible as a coach. I'll say, if you can dream it, you can make it happen. You're capable of nearly anything. And so I think I grew up with a basic idea, a desire to believe. As I lost my faith, my spiritual faith, I didn't quit. I didn't lose my belief that the human was capable of more than they knew they were capable of. Maybe it's too many superhero stories. Maybe it's too much believing in the hero. Maybe it's I don't know what it is, but I believe that. And then I had the opportunity to mentor with a coach at the University of Texas in Bev Kearney, who operated absolutely along the lines of she created trading protocols in place exactly to get them to X and then asked them to go to Y. And I would see now her sport, her, her sport is track and field, just like ours. But her event was the 100 meter dash and the 200 meter dash or the long jump. And I'm sure I'm already already anticipating Chris's arguments is that the difference between a race that takes 10 to 11 seconds and what takes two to three hours or four hours to accomplish. That's a lot of time that she was asking them to transcend based on a sort of flight fighter flight kind of response. But I still want to believe, and I don't have to be right, but I still want to believe. And I've had a handful, maybe two handfuls of absolute reinforcement that that is capable of happening. And I just guess I feel like I said in the initial, what's my success transcendence? I'm looking for that because I do think every human being is built that way. They're ready for that, even the most logically minded individual. And I think maybe Chris is still attracted to me as a coach of helping him get to the place that he needs to get to, because while he doesn't trust it, he's happy for a little magic to come his way should it happen. But I don't know that for a fact, but I just know if he continues to work with me, he knows I'm going to still be in that space. Now, again, I only bring that out to the athletes who want that.

Thank you. I'm going to ask you both if you have examples of where one of your runners felt the magic. I'd like to hear, as a coach, your all's experience of observing the magic. Even for you, Chris, maybe you could start if you have…well, let's go with Steve. But I'd like to know when a runner is really struggling, pushing their aerobic, infant has moved on to teenager, possibly even mature adult. They've really got the aerobic system. They've worked with you for years. Is there still magic? And when there is, what is it?

Well, I mean, Chris and I probably know what I'm going to say. I'm going to use Nora Colgan as an example. I mean, this is a person who Chris will say, oh, but we all knew she could qualify for the Olympic trials, but I don't think Nora thought she could qualify. I think Nora thought she should qualify for the Olympic trials. Would you say that's correct? Accurate? And so she knew she had a latent capability, but she didn't believe that she could get there. And this is how magic works. She didn't reach the goal time. She didn't meet the time, Kevin. She didn't get there. She missed it by a minute. She kept fighting all the way to the end. This is the thing. She believed that she could get the time, but she didn't know if she... We had brainwashed her to the point. We got her from X. She knew she could do X, which was 247, but she didn't know if she could run 245. But she believed. She trusted. She went for it. She went after it. She missed it. She made 245 high. Well, guess what? The universe conspired. They changed the time. They moved it 50 seconds back, a minute back. So she makes it, gets the qualifier. Yeah, OK. A skeptic can go through and say, here, there's this reason, there's this reason, there's this reason. You know what? I told the girl she could qualify for the Olympic trials and I got her the Olympic trials. Game over. Game, match, set.

Magic found.

Well, I don't think that was magic, though. We all knew she could run that. Now there may have been magic getting her to believe it, but physically we knew she could do it. I think the best example in your history of magic might be Mark Bergman running low 230s. I mean, that to me probably transcends any performance I've seen from a Team Rogue athlete.

But he, okay, Mark Bergman. So in this case, this is an athlete who had been working with an incredibly skilled, very talented coach and John Shrupp, who's been on this podcast with us. And Mark had bought in hook, line and sinker to the process with which his coach got him ready. He got a new coach, and this happened so often when an athlete moves from one training system and one sort of methodology. And John and I's methodologies are similar in terms of the right workouts that we write, but we just change them just a bit. So I had an athlete that had been well trained by another coach who I highly respected. So I didn't get in the way of that at all. And the athlete came to me looking for a little magic sauce, like a little shake and bake. And so and he actually brought to me the goal time that he wanted to run. And all I said to him, the thing that actually made that happen was he thought he came to me with a race plan that he thought for sure I was going to say would not I would not allow. And in that meeting that we met at the Starbucks on 2222 in Mopac, I know exactly when we met. And I didn't realize this, but I thought he was 100 percent sure I was going to say, no, Mark, I don't want to follow this plan because I was known as a coach who wanted athletes to negative split no matter what. He came with a plan, which was a site, which was with a very slight negative, very slight positive split. But knowing that the positive split would come in, the pain would be so great. So all I did was say yes. Two things I did. Number one, I said yes to the plan, which I think shocked him and totally shocked him. And number two, I said, don't fuck with my win loss record. So you made this plan and I'm agreeing to it, but this is your plan and I believe in you. And I also told him, I don't know that anybody else could do this but you. I said that in all honesty. It wasn't mine trickery, but it was I believe that you can do it. And he says, he will tell you that over the last three to four miles of suffering, he said, don't lose, don't lose. You got to win. You got to win. And I don't know, all I did, I think there what happened was he got the benefit of the old coach who did all the things right. He just needed a little bit of difference. And, you know, you change the from night to day, you change the paint on a wall and all of a sudden the room looks different. I think a little bit that that's what happened. And, you know, it's is that I can see where someone would say that's not magic. But it's what I don't really believe that. I just think we're small minded. I think we're smaller. We view ourselves smaller. And those folks, those folks who want to go down the road of life, thinking that X1 plus 1 equals 2 are welcome to do that. But I'm open and willing to believe that 1 plus 1 can equal 2, 3 or any other number set. My skill set to get them to make, to go outside the realm of what they're capable of is limited to what I can do, what they bring to me. I think that case of Mark Bergman was a magic mix of a lot of different little things that happened for that particular athlete to get there.

Sure.

Hey Chris, you've been kind of quiet. Do you have any thoughts on magic before we move on?

I think, first of all, that Steve, to me as a coach, is magic at knowing exactly the right thing to say, not only in one-on-ones, but also in any moment you see him in a workout or a race. There's nobody better, in my opinion, at saying the three words you need to hear at mile 11 of a half marathon or mile 20 of a marathon because as a coach, those are hard moments. When you're getting literally no time with them, it's hard to know what to say besides, good job, keep pushing, whatever. And you'll never hear that from Steve. He always somehow dives into your soul and figures out exactly the three words you need in the moment, which are going to be different every single time. And that taps into something in you that allows you to find a new place, perhaps. And so, in a sense, he's magical with that. He's got a skill set there that I envy as a coach. I think it's funny listening to this, because I think of myself as an analytical minded person being coached by someone who's more intuitive and philosophical. It's really fascinating, but maybe he gives me that side that I'm looking for, that I don't get for myself. For me, though, as I think about my athletes' results, I can't think of a time when I wasn't, when I was surprised by a result. You know, I always have a sense. I have a really good sense. Like I said, one of my spidey senses as a coach is being able to know what someone can accomplish. And sometimes I'll tell them what they can accomplish, and they don't believe me. And then we have to go through a process of getting them to believe and proving it to them. But I can't say I've ever had a result where I was surprised. Now, I think sometimes athletes have run faster than I thought they might, but then I can look back at the training and say, okay, yeah, it was in there, and we had just been maybe a little conservative with our plan. But again, I lean towards, you know, you train for what you can accomplish on race day.

Chris, stay true to his scientific upbringing. All right, so I think where we are now, we're about to get to the next and last section. I'd like to summarize the whole thing so far. So thank you all so much. The insights here are awesome. I hope for those listening as well. We talked about ingredients early on after we understood what success is from the perspective of the coach. The alchemy is taking those ingredients, honing them, sharpening them, knowing that your runners can achieve, can transcend should they choose to do so. The alchemy is a long journey though because it's a long race, a marathon. And your training programs, which I'm well aware of, are complicated, and there is a big commitment that takes place. And I wonder so often, this is my biggest wonder as a non-runner, why on earth are these crazy folks doing this? What is driving them? And I think, so after we've got the science, which was wonderful, it's clear you all are professionals at what you are doing for your runners. And after the magic, which is something that's just so hard to encapsulate here, but I know that you both have it on, despite your protestations, Chris, I know you both have it out there in the world. But let's now just kind of cut to the chase and say why, the big why, like what is driving these folks? What is the result? We're in the results section. Just off the cuff, what on earth are runners doing?

I think most people at some level deep inside are trying to learn about themselves. There might be a time associated, a time goal or a race distance accomplishment they're trying to achieve. But I think all of us that stay in this game very long are trying, we're in a process of self-discovery. Talking about the transcendence of the person that Steve was referencing, that's what I think we're all trying to achieve is digging into the dark parts of ourselves that only running can provide a crucible for. And then learning and dealing with the messy stuff as you kind of go through the process of sharpening and crushing and burning sometimes, the fires that we go through, you learn about yourself, and then as a result become a better version of yourself, kind of transcend. And so I think that's deep down what we're all seeking. It comes in the form of time goals. It comes in the form of Boston qualifying goals. It comes in the form of running a distance like the marathon that's crazy on the surface. But I think that's all what we're looking for.

Great. What about you, Steve?

It's the human condition. I mean, we're... All religion is based around the fact that somebody needs something. And I think everyone needs something. And there are those who find that something through pushing the pleasure principle. And there's others that are just clicked the way their synapses work, the way their internal chemistry functions as they need to suffer. And I think we see the sufferers, and we recruit the sufferers in every way. I do think there's another piece here that Chris alluded to right from the very beginning, which is so important, and we haven't... And I know, Kevin, you know this for sure, because this is the thing that attracts you to Rogue the most, is that we also have a community around it. So we embrace the suck. That's kind of gotten to the point to be an almost a cheeseball sort of cliche. I think we've actually made it a cliche. And we find those out there who also want to embrace the suck. And we tell them they have a home, and we tell them that they're going to walk this journey by themselves and alone, but there will be others with them. Because I think one of my great friends and mentors as a coach, Ricardo Troncoso, who his wife coaches with Rogue. At the time I was running with him, I was very uninspired as an athlete. I was about to be done with my post-collegiate running career. I was jaded and finished. And he said to me basically that people don't want to find an answer to a question. They want to find an answer to a question. They don't want to ask the question. And because they don't want to ask the question, they wander around uninformed, just lost. My nickname to him at the time was Little Boy Lost, because he kept saying, you want answers, you want answers, when answers, you don't want to ask a question. And I think that that's what happens at Rogue, that people come in asking a personal question about who they are and what they're all about. They know that the others around them are also asking that question. They trust that that's happening. And then they find solidarity and community in the group while still walking that individual path. And I think that many of them don't recognize that yet. They don't see that. But those who do, then they're hooked forever because they just know that it's nothing special. I think that's one of the things we use, some of the fancy sauce, and we use stuff to try to make it seem special because there's a marketing play in all of that. There's a game to it. But at the end of the day, we know that what we're selling is really just, as Chris said, self-exploration, asking the question, being willing to ask the question, and then knowing that there's a whole bunch of other people around you asking that same question. And the results that you're asking for, that's why I say transcendence, that the people walk away. Sometimes, occasionally, we get an answer. More often than not, it's just more questions. Or the same question repeated at ad nauseum. I don't know. I really don't have an answer for that. I don't have a way to say it's worthwhile. I just know that the people who do it, who find it worthwhile, keep coming back for more.

Fantastic. Chris?

To me, the group is where the magic is, however you want to define it. But in my own experience as a runner, when you're following in line with four, five, six, seven, eight athletes, all doing a similar workout, trying to accomplish something together, maybe we're together in a race, as I've been with some of my teammates before, and you get into that flow with a group, whether you're pushing hard or whether you're just running easy and having a good time and talking to each other, you get into that flow where time stops and everything becomes effortless. In a way that you've never felt on your own, that's where the magic is. And I think that's often what we give people, is the context and community to find that magic with others. Because there is something about, I do believe in chemistry across humans that you can't necessarily see.

Isn't that magic?

We're getting really deep into that.

Now I'm backing up on my perspectives here. But there is something to that. And that to me as an athlete is what I am looking for, often now more than anything else, but I think is also what we give people that allows them to find places in themselves that they didn't think were possible when they showed up.

Flow state optimization. Rogue has gotten really good at that. I do think though that we do have two different kinds of people now that I said that we've got the sufferers. Those are chasing the pain, chasing the suffering. And then we have the flow state, the people who are chasing the flow state. I always feel sympathy and empathy for the flow state chasers because it's so much easier to find pain and suffering and so much harder to find that flow state. And those who are addicted to that flow state, they have to wait long and hard to get there. And I think when we do see plateaus, sometimes those folks who are in that long plateau section or are having an expectation of the universe or an life experience that's just not ready for them yet, and they've just got to wait. But they don't want to do that because they're so addicted to the flow state. It's so much easier for those folks who are just addicted to pain and suffering and know they'll come out some other way on the other side. And I think we see both of them at Rogue.

I've got a question for you, Kevin, as we close this up and wrap it up. And first of all, I'll say to preface it, while I am an analytical person who believes in the science leading to results, I am agnostic on the question of magic. And I can argue one side, but I'm open minded to it. And I think that belief is important, whether or not it's real. But going to you, outsider looking in, lawyer mind, logical thinker, do you believe in magic in the context of Rogue?

Yeah, 100%. I mean, thank you. Great way to end our conversation. The magic, absolutely 100% in my view, has been that the challenges you all take on willingly and with each other are profound. Each person that I've gotten the privilege to know has transcended their start point when they began with Rogue to when I find them somewhere along the journey of Rogue. And I've really been impressed in the magic of sticking with Rogue and sticking with a concept and continuing to develop self and notions of the suffering, sometimes notion of euphoria, finding the zone, but always continuing, always continuing to come back. Y'all are such magic practitioners to keep people coming back, to keep vibrant, to keep current. And so yeah, I would say as an outsider looking in, you know, it's hard if you're not a sufferer to process it, but the magic that Rogue does, that's super clear to understand. So thank you all so much for sharing some of your thoughts today.

Yeah, this was good. And hopefully the listeners picked up a thing or two in this journey of kind of understanding the alchemy of coaching, the alchemy of running. We really appreciate everybody letting us do this sometimes, just kind of going off.

So I want to, again, I want to thank Kevin. He's been a friend, a great friend and a great mentor. And thank you for being willing to come. I knew you were a willing, willing participant, but I thank you for being in a place that allows us to sort of... Chris and I have begun to realize more and more that this podcast is about following what we feel is important to the runners that we work with. And I think we're in a bit of shock that what we feel is sort of got its finger on the pulse of what's happening out there. So one thing I want to give a shout out to another podcast. I recently was a guest, and I know, Chris, you were a guest as well, on a podcast called The Start Sign, an opportunity to talk to Brandy and Wendy on their podcast. Their nascent podcast was pretty new at this. I think I was their fourth or fifth guest. A huge shout out to those ladies. And if those of you who do listen to our podcast, you might find similar things of interest that we talk about over there. They're both rogues running the York City Marathon. I had a great time talking with them. They've got on tap more great guests. So shout out to The Start Sign. Maybe Chris could put that in the show notes. And we love to send them. I would love to see them continue to do more and more podcasting and get more great guests.

Yeah, it's a good perspective from the runners in our groups, and not just from us. Well, thank you all for listening. This is episode 33. As always, you can check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Instagram, Facebook or Twitter at Rogue Running. Until next time, talk to you then.