Hey, everybody, welcome to episode 409 of the Running Rogue podcast. Back to you after a week away. I was on vacation in Mexico, and now we're back on it. Excited to continue our conversations on mental training. This time, we're going to be talking about vision and goals. We've talked purpose, talked some of the other elements of mental training. Now we're going to drill in on vision for your future and goal setting, what that should look like. Talk about some do's, talk about some don'ts. Should be a good conversation. But first, how are you, James?

I'm doing well. How was Mexico?

I was good.

Like, I was forgetting.

It was super low key. We went to Baja, which is, you know, the peninsula over there on the west coast. Just we're in a little spot north of Cabo that is really off the beaten path on the Sea of Cortez side of the peninsula, the east side of that peninsula, which is swimmable water, beautiful beaches, generally pretty off the grid. So you have to be okay with a little bit rustic, but you can also find nicer stuff too. But, but anyway, it was, yeah, unplugged, no kids. They were at summer camp. So just my wife and I, and we had a great time.

That's awesome.

So yeah, it was what the doctor ordered.

You celebrated America in Mexico.

Well, we were, we were actually back here for 4th of July. So we were here seeing my parents and Tyler on July 4th. So, but we did get to see some of me one of Mexico's games. They're not the game against England, but the one against Ecuador. And we watched that at a restaurant and everybody was there cheering on Mexico. So that was a cool vibe to be.

That's awesome.

A part of that win, which was pretty huge getting past the round of 32 for them. So anyway, it was a good time, a good time. Sad, the US left that tournament though, although based on our last performance, we deserved to be out of that one, unfortunately.

I feel a little guilty. I turned it off at half time and just went to bed.

I mean, I made it through probably 85 minutes, and then I was like, I can't do this anymore. It was just ugly. We just never showed up for better or worse. For whatever reason, not sure what happened, but Belgium played better than us. They were better than us on every single dimension, mentality, tactics, energy level, quality, technical. All of the things, they were better than us, but also we laid a real stinker. I mean, three of the goals were mistakes directly from our players. So anyway, hard to see us go out like that.

Yeah.

But c'est la vie. Now we watch the rest of it. Now we all have to pick a new team to root for.

It's funny, I only will watch if I feel like I want to, because I'm not that into soccer, generally speaking, not a super fan. But Mexico-England was an unbelievable game, and then Argentina-Cape Verde, and then Argentina-Egypt, it's like, those have been some unbelievable games.

Really good. I mean, I got into Colombia, Switzerland yesterday, which ended in PKs with Switzerland advancing, and 0-0, so not a lot of goal scoring, but just an even back-and-forth game the whole time, and a lot of energy and passion on both sides, and it went to penalties, and Switzerland prevailed. So yeah, a lot of good games, a lot of good games to come. I think England, Norway is going to be fascinating. Spain versus ultimately probably France in the semis, you know, anticipate that coming. So there's a lot, a lot going.

The Norway has the super tall blonde hair dude. Holland, yeah, I was trying to remember his name. I did catch his, that last game. And it's funny, I saw a real, and I was thinking something similar, but there was a real recently where it's like, he looks like he's just wandering around lost and bored. And then bam, he scores, and he's back to just walking around.

I mean, those guys just, and Messi does the same thing. Messi's obviously more involved, typically in the possession, but he does the same kind of thing, where he'll just be walking around looking innocuous, and then all of a sudden, bang, and Holland definitely has that mastered. I think he's averaging one goal every 14 touches or something like that.

Wow.

It's just crazy. Anyway, but yeah, a lot of good soccer left. At this point, I think we have to root, or I am rooting for a non-traditional winner. You know, there's only been eight champions of the World Cup in its, I think this is the 23rd edition of the World Cup, since it started back in the 1920s. So only eight countries have ever won. Five from Europe, three from South America. All the usual names you would think of, plus Uruguay. And so now we have, in the final eight, we have four teams that have won before. Argentina, Spain, France, England. And then we have four that have never won. Morocco, Belgium, Switzerland, Norway. And for me, now that I don't have a dog in the fight, I got to root for a non-incumbent champion. So give me Norway or Switzerland, I think would be the top of my list at this point. Love to see Morocco would be the first African champion. So anyway, rooting for a, can't root for Belgium because they sent us home. So rooting for a non-prior champion at this point. Unfortunately, it doesn't look like that's the way it's going to play out based on the play so far. But you never know, as we've seen, any game, anything can happen.

Yeah.

So anyway, this is not a soccer podcast. Let's get to the running part. We're talking today about, as we said, vision and goals. I think this one will be a pretty tight conversation. But coming off this idea of purpose, why do you do what you do in this sport? And really making sure you're spending time on that. And now we're going to, through vision, paint the picture of what your future could look like, and through goals, take that picture and make it specific to the next big task at hand. And so that's kind of how I think about what those various words mean. But let's just start with it. Would love your perspective on this. When we talk about vision, what do you think about?

I was honestly just in my head, and I've shared this before, I think, but I was just thinking of like vision is your capital A to capital B. So capital A is where you're at right now, and capital B is like the, it's where I want to be, like the long term perspective. And then, yeah, goals being little A's to little B's all along the way that actually bridge that gap from capital A to capital B.

Yep. I like that picture. And I think the thing about vision is it doesn't necessarily have to be, doesn't necessarily have to look a certain way. You know, sometimes vision, a vision could be in a statement. You'll see that often with companies or nonprofits. They'll have a vision statement on their website or something like that. So it could be a statement, but it could also be an image of what the future looks like. But it's, one thing about vision is that it's not short term. It's the longer term. And one of the ways I like to have people think about it is, where do you want to be regardless of timeline? If you're dreaming, take years and months out of it for a second. Where do you want to be, given the biggest dream that you can dream? And that usually helps people open up their aperture a little bit versus looking at the very next thing. And so vision should be timeless in a sense. I mean, obviously, you know, we're all time-bound humans, so you know, perhaps there's some natural timeline that plays into it. But it shouldn't be anchored on time. It should be anchored outside of time. And it should be basically, from my vantage point, the biggest dream, a picture of the biggest dream you can have in the sport and what that looks like. There's ways to get there. We're going to talk about one of the specific ways to get there. So yes, if you could put it into an image or words, what your dream is for the sport, that's what we're talking about here with vision. Why do you think that's important?

I think it's the... I've heard a psychologist say it this way. It's the vision that sustains you through your perilous journey. So, much like our why... And I've used that in weddings, actually, like a wedding metaphor, as I've used journey analogies when officiating weddings. And that's why it was so readily available when you asked that. But even though that's someone else's wise words, I find that to be true. It's like similar to... It's like we're hitting basically a different angle. Like when we talked about the why, I quoted Nietzsche, and it was like, he who has a why can bear any how. And so like you got to have that like language side of like purpose, where you're like, I got to do this. But we're also visual creatures, like we're dreamers. We love going to the movies. Like these are all elements of our life that we're like, we see these things that we like want to do. And so, yeah, I think like when it gets long and hard or perilous, you got to have something to hold on to. And it's not just like a, like I think maybe with your why, you might have some purpose, but that might feel a little dutiful. Like you also got to have that dream. And then I would say like vision being a little more specific within the dream, but still I put all of that in that bucket.

It's also multi-dimensional. I think it's important to point out because I think sometimes when we think about these things, we, people think about, well, here's the one thing I want, the one dream I have. And vision to me is much more multi-dimensional. It's conclusive of the potential accolades, the outcomes you want to achieve, but also includes how you want to achieve them, what you want your values to be along the way, what you want your work to look like, and the characteristics of your journey to be. And so it's multi-dimensional. I'm thinking about the Courtney Dewalter pain cave analogy where she likes to in dark times on races literally visualize exploring the pain cave and kind of uncovering the crevices in there. And this is kind of like that, but in the sort of forward-looking dreaming sense is that if you could discover all of the nuance and cracks and crevices and beautiful things, that you're going to hope to see in your journey, then what are those things and what are they going to look like? Which is why the tool that we recommend in this process is, some might say cheesy, but really critical because it helps you bring out that multi-dimensionality. It also helps you bring out that visual element, put it into pictures as you were talking about. And that's this idea of creating a vision board for yourself. And just like a purpose statement, it should be sustaining, meaning more than just a picture of what the immediate future looks like. But it's also something that's going to evolve, like a purpose statement might evolve. But you do it once, you might come back to it every three years or something like that, and see how the vision has changed or evolved as you, stepped through it. So again, people are going to hear that term and think, well, that's a cheesy thing. But it's a process that, while it may sound cheesy, is really, really powerful at manifesting what that future could be. So what's the vision board, and how do you recommend people work on it?

Well, I was going to comment on that cheesy part too. I was going to say, like, there's an element here, though, that visions bring about fun. Like, it's positive, you know? Because it can't all be duty and purpose. It's like... And there's things that, like, you might discover that you're drawn to that... Anyway, I'm going off on a tangent. We're trying to...

That's okay. Ten minutes are cool.

But for a vision board itself, the first time I ever did a vision board, I wasn't doing it specifically for Running. Running was part of my vision board, but I did it because of The Artist's Way, a book you referenced a couple weeks ago. Julia Cameron recommended that you do this, right? And so I actually had a boatload of fun. I bought the big poster board that you get at your grocery store that you did in grade school.

The science fair board kind of thing.

And then I prefer this route because it's like tactile. You're using your hands and you're coming across things, and it's just kind of fun. So I went and found as many old magazines as I possibly could and just cut stuff out that I liked. And then I liked to group as well. And so I don't think that everyone has to do this, but it's like first just cutting it all out, and then I started grouping things. And so again, with my personal life, I was grouping like, oh, there was like some craft beers and wine in one section. So I kind of kept all that in that area. And then wilderness photos of like a mighty elk, like, you know, calling out into the sky with like beautiful green trees behind them. So I started adding in all these like trail running, like scenery and everything. And so I moved to different, you know, I kept, I bunched mine where it was like an entire collage and everything was covered and they were even overlapping. But I still did a little bit of grouping along the way. And I'm picturing like an athlete could take all of those same elements, but it's like their shoes are all in the bottom left corner or top right or whatever, and they can do singlets and they pictures of crowds or honestly, I'd love to see someone's just to.

Yeah, I mean, there are no rules in a sense, right? It's just images and pictures that represent where you want to go in a sense. And they don't necessarily have to be directly correlated, you know, it could be an image of someone you admire. And basically, that's a manifestation of wanting things like they have or wanting to work like they have to achieve something. And so there's, you know, it doesn't have to be direct imagery. It can be indirect and metaphorical in a sense. But it's basically just this opportunity to do an art project like we did as kids. Cut out pictures, magazines, you can draw things, you can write on there, you can put words in there if you want, but mostly images. And it's just a way to capture the things you think about when you think about what your future would look like in the sport and put it all in one place, so that you can then come back to it and look at it and start to remember, first of all, what you want, but then also hopefully manifest some of those things coming true in your own world. And so it's basically an art project, but one that is a fruitful art project to help paint a picture of where you want to go. And one of the things I like to talk about commonly in our world, and I think this is important in all phases of our running journey, but also especially important in certain specific instances, is this idea of having a duality of mind when it comes to manifesting, to doing, to achieving the things you want in the sport. On one hand, the duality is this, on one hand, you need to dream and have the opportunity to paint clear pictures of what you want, again, regardless of timeline. Timeless, in a sense. And you have to let yourself go there periodically, and a vision board is a great way of letting yourself go there, because you can look at it and let your mind wander to the things that are represented there. But you can't stay there, because if you stay in the dream, you'll never achieve it. So the other side, the kind of flip side of this duality of mind that I want you to have, is that you have to be very, very present. And we'll, we've obviously already talked about some of the tactics. We'll get more specific with the tactics in this conversation as we get to goal setting. But the vision board or the vision is the dreaming part. You can't stay there. So then you got to go to the practical way of getting there, which is to be present and to execute on the next step, the next step in the process. Because I think what happens too often is people get stuck in the middle, so to speak. Where they're thinking about where they need to be in three months, six months, nine months. And therefore, perhaps trying to take shortcuts, perhaps getting overwhelmed by how far they are from where they want to go, and therefore not doing things or overdoing things as a result. But if you let yourself dream periodically, but then switch back to that present mind and just say, all right, what's the next little thing I need to do to get towards that goal or to that vision? Do that, stay present there, and then one after another, eventually you'll start to see the milestones kick away. And again, you can't get stuck in the middle as a part of that process. And so this is the dreaming part, the painting, the picture part, it's arts and crafts. One of the things I think for those that are more practical like me in creating a vision board, to me, this starts with, for me specifically, I'm only going to recommend this because I've done it this way. I like to start by brainstorming words and lists to help kind of create the imagery. I am a person who is more visual, more word oriented than most, more analytical. And so it's hard for me just to thumb through pictures and get to inspiration. It can come, but it's not the way it naturally comes for me. So the way it naturally comes for me is to ask myself questions, start to make lists of values, of achievements, of people that inspire me, of characteristics of the work I would like to do. And then once I start to put those things down on paper, then I can start to match that with imagery that goes with it. And so I also think for some people, just doing some basic brainstorming around key questions can be an important part of this process. Some people can jump straight to the imagery. Personally, for me, I need some of those prompts, kind of cues. And so some of those, we talk about many of them in the book, are things like ones I've already mentioned, which is who are your heroes in the sport? For example, if you're excited to cheer someone on in the sport, and who are they, what does their work look like? What are their values look like? What are the characteristics of them that inspire you? That's one question to answer. What are specific goals, those little A's along the way that you would want to achieve? Like, for example, a lot of people talk about, in our sport, qualifying for Boston. OK, well, write that on the list, and then start to write things around that about why you want that. And you start to do that enough with a few little prompts, and then you can go to the imagery and start to put it all together, and sometimes go back and forth. So that's one of the tips I give for somebody like me who needs to see stuff on paper before I can necessarily match the images to it.

Yeah, it's interesting. We're a little inverted there, but it's kind of cool because I think it's for everyone, but it's like you use the words and sort of expand into the vision, and I'm like, I'll see a vision and then try to work backwards and figure out the words. Yeah, but I feel like there's no skipping either. It's just the doorway you enter through, you know?

Yeah. I mean, this is kind of, to put another practical edge on it, you know, Pinterest. I think it's a less commonly used social media platform these days, I think, because I've never used it. But it's basically this idea. Pinterest is basically a vision board for things you want. People would create them for their weddings. These are things I want to happen to my wedding. If they're in that window of time or parenting things, they would just pull stuff from the internet and post it there, basically, as a way to remind themselves of stuff, to create a sort of practical vision board for them. And so this is basically creating the Pinterest version of what your future could look like in the sport.

Yeah.

And again, there are no rules, really. It's just a matter of if you could paint in pictures or words or imagery what that future looks like for you, your dream, your vision of it. Do it. One of the nuances of this that we get to, which is kind of a different angle, but it's, and it can be interwoven with the vision board process, but something that we've had fun with, with some of our athletes, especially our virtual athletes, is this idea of creating a spirit animal for your running journey. That we have spirit animals on our virtual running teams that we talk about when we talk about people and what kind of energy they're bringing to the sport. And I always find that interesting. But it also, it's a way of capturing what you want the journey to look like for you and how you show up in it, so to speak. So do you have an example, like of a good, we don't have to use names, but a good spirit animal that we've talked about before with one of our athletes?

Oh, we had an athlete that we called him the Buffalo because he just took on adversity head on. And there's that old story of like, when storms are coming, cows will run from it, but buffaloes run through it. They actually bypass the storm faster that way. Someone else is a fox. He saw it on a golf course. So we've gotten into it with people. Super fun, playful ones, I've given. I told someone once that they were a dolphin, just because they were so fun and playful and super smart. But I actually prefer that people kind of pick their own and treat it like we're doing this. Like, I guess we're in our right brain today, like very artsy and creative, but it's like, I think it's something that like stands out to you. Like for whatever reason. Okay, so I read so much psychology and I'm going to quote some of Dr. Peterson here, but it's like, he talks so much, like I see so much value into this. He talks a lot and I would, he takes multiple hours to defend this, but I already trust it. So if people step in and trust it here, I'll say this, the world manifest itself according to your aim. And again, because I've listened to all of his lectures, like that role, that top thesis, I buy. And so some people might hear that off the cuff and randomly, and it's like, I don't even know what that means, and I don't buy it, right? But because I believe that, I think that the things you end up seeing, it fits this substrate. Like you end up seeing the things that mean something to you. And we know this in marketing. It's sort of like, I never knew there were billboards for mattresses, but now that I'm shopping for a mattress, that's all I see. And we know that that is so common, but we sort of refute, or maybe just have never taken the time to understand ourselves and our brains. But because I believe that, I'm like, people with their spirit animal, I want them to, like, it's like, for me, it was always a hawk. Every time I was driving, and I wasn't even trying to get into spirit animals, it's just that, like, I could not not see the hawk. Now anyone that drives on Mopac today, if they were listening to this, looks up, there's a hawk, the hawks are always there. They're always up there on the light poles or whatever. But there's a reason why I always noticed the hawk, right? Because someone else is in the car, and they're like, I didn't notice a hawk. Like, they don't just, right? So I'm not saying, it's not anything weird and kooky. It's more of, you quite literally see what you're wanting or what you're aiming at, right? And so there is the aiming, which is the conscious side, but then there's the subconscious. There's the, I don't know why, but that jumps out at me, right? And so I think people, if they're looking, I got super technical, and I want to come back to this playful lighthearted side. But I'm like, the thing that you noticed the most, like, yeah, that one's your spirit animal.

And it can manifest in the vision board, but it doesn't have to be. It could be a separate exercise, but it's basically the idea of how you want to show up. And we've ascribed animals those sort of characteristics. Some of them are perhaps placed on them by humans. Perhaps some of them are real and instinctual within them. I think people have talked about me being the owl, the sort of wise, analytical one, which I'll take because it's true. And also, owls are great hunters. So when it's time to hunt, I think I can be quite good at that in a race format, for example. So I have that killer instinct when it comes. But those opportunities I pick very carefully. So anyway.

I've got a couple owls hooting in the tree above. Like if it's like 4.30 or 5.00 in the morning and it's super dark, I'll hear them in the morning. So it's so cool. There's a huge tree that wraps over my casitas.

So we've digressed a little bit. But that can be a part of this process for you. And again, this vision board should be multi-dimensional. What are the achievements you see along the way? Who do you want to be like along the way? What do you want your work to look like? What do you want your experiences to look like? Paint the picture with imagery in whatever format works for you. And lock it in, right? And then look at it frequently, and then periodically go back to it. So that's the big picture, so to speak. Pun intended, I guess. And now we're going to get to the more incremental picture, which is the goal setting process. So now we've got the big picture, but we've got to, as you talked about, turn that from a big A and a big B into little A's and little B's along the way, so little milestones. And this is where we start to put time boundaries on things, and we start to pick specific targets for things and put times and dates and specific parameters around what we want. And those milestones can be as short as five or six months away, perhaps, if you're talking about one training cycle, and it could be maybe 18 months away or two years away. But typically, the goal setting process is going to be something that's looking a little bit closer in. And has, I would say, probably a timeline within the next couple of years to achieve. And it might have some mini goals along the way if you're looking at a two year process. But what's the goal setting? How do we do that? What does it look like? And what are some things to do and things to avoid? And one of the things we're going to talk about here, which we'll come back to, is what the goals should look like. And there's two main kinds that we talk about. There are other kinds. I've actually seen Steve Magnus talk about this recently, where he talks about the science behind the effectiveness of different types of goals. And I'll kind of spoil the main storyline here, but basically science tells us that process goals are more effective than outcome goals, as he recently shared in one of his expos. So as we get into goal setting, and I actually think it's both, in a sense, typically, but the power of process goals cannot be understated. And I think a lot of times when we think about goal setting, we think, well, I want to accomplish this thing that has traditional parameters on it, like I want to run a marathon, or I want to run a marathon at a certain time, or I want to run a half, or I want to run a half at a certain time, or I want to do a 50-mile, or I want to do a 50-mile at a certain time. And so we typically think in outcomes when we're thinking about goal setting. And what we're going to suggest is that you think about outcomes, perhaps, but no matter what your setting process goals, because outcomes don't come without process. And again, kind of leading the witness, jumping to the conclusion here intentionally, because I don't want to miss it. But that is one of our main messages.

Yeah, it's like outcomes are a detail. So they're important, they're in there, yes. But it's not the full, it's not comprehensive. Outcomes are not comprehensive. Your process is what ultimately gets you to the outcome.

Yeah, and I'll share this. I share this story in the book, and it's one that struck me for as long as I can remember, to be honest, as someone who's been a goal-achieving person. But there's a great story about Henry Aaron, Hank Aaron, famous baseball home run hitter who would eventually pass Babe Ruth's total home run record. Now, he did it in very different way. Instead of hitting 60 home runs a year for a shorter period of time, he was the guy that hit 30 to 40 a year for a longer period of time. And so he was once asked in a press conference or an interview about his goal-setting process. And somebody said, hey, do you set a goal to hit 35 home runs a year? And that's how you got here. So many years later, being Babe Ruth's record, I think, has now been passed with an asterisk by Barry Bonds. But he said, no, I actually don't ever set goals around how many home runs I hit. He said, I set goals around my process, which is how much time I'm going to spend on batting practice every week, how much time I'm going to spend studying pitchers, how much time I'm going to spend working on my strength and mobility. So he was very, very laser focused on what are the steps that will allow me then to be in position to hit those home runs when those opportunities come. Because he was also someone who got pitched around a lot. So part of it, the outcome goals for him are completely out of his control. If a pitcher is not willing to throw him a wall down the middle of the plate, he's not going to be able to hit a home run. And so he sort of said, hey, I'm going to focus on the controllables, which is the work I can do that will put me in position. If I do it consistently enough year after year to hit these home runs, and eventually they add up to beating Babe Bruce's record at the time. And that's drawing the parallel back to running, essentially what we're asking you to do here. And yes, you might have the outcome goal, I want to break four hours at this marathon, or I want to break two hours at this half marathon. But then what is your process to get there? How many miles a week are you going to run? How many quality sessions are you going to do a week? How easy are you going to go on those easy runs and recovery runs so that you can go the paces you want on your quality sessions? What are you going to do about recovery broadly? If that means sleep or nutrition or fueling in whatever ways, what does that look like? What are the things you need to focus on? And we're not telling you to dot every I and cross every T when you're laying out process goals. I think a couple weeks ago, I talked about the most important run is the one you don't want to do. And so in that season, I gave that example I gave, I had a process goal around getting my Wednesday recovery run in and basically creating an advent calendar on checking the box week after week of that Wednesday recovery run, which I had to do on my own after I coached, when it was too hot to want to do it. And it was my hardest run to get done. And so I just created a process goal around it because I needed that recovery from my Tuesday quality so that I could go do my Wednesday or Thursday medium long run. So it doesn't have to be every I dotted, every T crossed when you're talking about these things. What are the key elements for you in your training journey so that you can nail the process? And for some people, that's going to be as simple as checking the box on runs. For some people, it's going to be more complex in terms of how many miles or what their distance looks like here, or how many 20 milers are going to run, or 14 milers are going to run in a half cycle. Whatever is your either weak spot or primary area of needing growth should be where you focus the process.

That's exactly what I was just thinking. Because this, it becomes back to the big broad, like we're going after vision here, it's like a friendly reminder that you can add on to an element of each of these every season based on the limiter or based on the blocker or whatever it is that you, you know, some people are like, all right, finally, I've gotten really good at averaging my 40 mile weeks, and now I want to reincorporate strength, or you're always adding one little element on. I used to think of it, honestly, visually as a Christmas tree. And then all these add-ons are like, you know, each time you're just adding another ornament, another ornament, another ornament. It's like, you know, for some it's, I'm just proud to get in my 40 miles. And now it's sort of like, no, I want to do them in a proper way. And you already gave the list of examples, so I won't repeat them, but I'm just emphasizing, you can add them season over season.

So that's one of the main messages here is, yes, outcomes are great. And I think it's important to set them, or set goals around outcomes, but they should always, always be paired with process. And sometimes you could have process goals without having outcome goals. Say, hey, I'm going to do this process, and I'm going to let the outcome kind of dictate itself, so to speak. An example of that situation would be when somebody's doing their first marathon, for example. I prefer they not set a time goal around that marathon. Your outcome goal is finish the marathon. And then your process goals are all the things you need to do to prepare. But there are situations where I don't want you worried so much about the time you're running. And then, as I like to say, you let the process dictate. Now does that mean you don't have a time? No, you still want to target a plan, as we've talked about, but it just means you're holding it loosely. And if you're going to run a half or a full, you need to have a plan. You need to execute in a certain way, tie to specific paces so that you can have a good experience and finish strong. But you don't necessarily have to set a specific time goal around that. You just have a target and a plan associated with how your process has shown you, you can run. So that's a situation where you might have process and not outcome goals. But often they're paired together. And one of the big points here again, just to reiterate, process and outcome goals should come together. Let's talk about some of the other things to avoid pitfalls. One of them, and maybe one of my most favorite goal setting pitfalls to avoid, is the idea of not having B and C goals. I just, you know how when somebody says something that kind of makes you cringe, but you can't outwardly show it? You have to keep the poker face. There are so many times as a coach where I've having conversations with runners, some I coach, most probably don't coach, where they come to me and they're like, I've got an A goal and a B goal and a C goal, and I just have to keep the poker face because they're not my athlete and I'm not supposed to tell them. But we're big fans of having an A goal, especially if we're talking about outcome goals and no plan B. No plan B. Plan B gives you an out, plan B gives you a backup, and mentally, it doesn't serve you. I think some people think of it as a consolation prize that they can get excited about in the moment if things are going wrong. But more than that, I think of it as a crutch that gives you a fallback plan. It gives you an excuse and out if things are getting a little bit hard. And so we're big on if you're setting outcome goals, A goal, no plan B, put all your eggs in the one basket.

It's making me think of one of the Renegade athletes, Travis, who, he like, I think it was in his post-race interview you did with him after he broke three in the marathon. Was it, no, Boston, sorry, he qualified for Boston. I remember hearing him say something to the effect, but basically what you're saying, but it was like, he never questioned if, he only asked how. Like it was like, no, that is what will be done. I will qualify for Boston, and I will go run Boston one day. And it was just this attitude of like, well, even if I didn't get it, there was no consideration of B or C, or like, now that I've learned a few things, maybe I'll switch it. It was just this like ice cold, like, yeah, there's one single issue.

It doesn't mean you get it on the one shot, but if you're going to give yourself the best chance, you got to put your eggs in the one basket. And if you miss, you miss. You got to face that, feel the feels, move on, learn from it. Failure is only quitting. It's not a failure if you keep trying. So, we're big on that. No plan B. And I think some people will debate us and argue on it because they might say, well, but then I won't be as motivated if things are going wrong. Like, okay. I mean, we've also talked about this contract with ourselves that we're going to give our all no matter what. So, isn't that enough? Isn't that enough, even if your goal is not in hand? So, I cringe when I hear people talk about B goals or C goals, and I have to usually keep my mouth shut, but here I am. It's my podcast. I get to talk about it. What are some other goal setting, either tips or pitfalls to avoid from your side?

And we cover this in different language in the book, but I always say like, if you're absolutely certain you can do it, it's not a goal. And that just comes up in conversation because usually I'm talking with athletes about their fears or doubts going in to a race or something. And in the spirit of trying to remind them that that's natural, in fact, I want them to feel like it would be weird if they didn't feel some of that. Because, and the way I come at that is, if it's a guarantee, it's not a goal then. Like it's just, it's not stretching you. So I don't know why I had to go roundabout to say that, but we talk about it in the book. It's like, it should feel like there is some risk on the table. Not risk for risk's sake, not overly risky, but there it needs to stretch. That's what makes it a goal.

Yeah, that one's tricky because it's absolutely true, but you also have to have to have to have the right amount of uncertainty. And I actually think that the right amount of uncertainty is a little bit tied to the individual, meaning that if you have too much uncertainty from people, then they give up trying, because it just seems too far off. I think some people are motivated by more uncertainty, so I'm not going to be able to give you a specific answer on what that looks like for you. Yes, there needs to be some degree of uncertainty. How much uncertainty, I think, is a little bit person specific. I think it also helps having a coach who can kind of get you in the right ballpark of uncertainty, because it should be a question. Can I get this? I'm not sure. But also at the same time, you should have a realistic expectation that's possible with the right work. And so finding that right balance, I think, is important for people. But that's a good one, because if you know you can do it, what's the point? You wouldn't be up for it, right? And that's why we do this stuff anyway. I always remind people of that when we have bad weather conditions going into races in my pre-race talks. I'm like, this is what you signed up for. You signed up for a challenge. If you knew it was gonna be easy, then you wouldn't have signed up for it. You wouldn't be as motivated by it. And so you want that right balance of hard and uncertain versus, okay, if I do the work, I think I can get there. And what that looks like for the individual, you have to kind of sort it.

These are not hard numbers based in science that people should write down. It's just a way of expressing myself to athletes. And I say this quite often with most of my athletes, and at the start of a season, I would expect you to be about 20% confident in what you're doing or the goal that you have for this race. And when you tow the line, I know my job's done if I got you to 80% confident. I'm never like... I tell them right out of the gate, I do it up in consultations now. There's just a confidence in it, but I'll just tell people. I'm like, I do not offer guarantees. Like, there is no guarantee. That's just practice. And there's no shade on that. But that's just practice. If you have 100% guarantee, then you're like, oh, cool. Well, then that's just another run. That's just what you do. That's practice. That's not a goal. That's not a... It's just, I'm coming at it from a definition standpoint. I'm like, that's just different, right? So I use that language of, you start off not very confident, but we get into the process, and that's a guarantee I offer, right? Like, I know how to get you to that 80%, but never like a, yeah, it's got to stretch. It's got to scare you a little bit.

What do you do with somebody who, and I think this is pretty rare, but what do you do with somebody who is dreaming or is setting goals that are just unrealistic for the window of time that they're talking about?

I think that I was going to say that's the key part. So I try to lovingly and in a spirit of compassion, like, pull that up into their vision for them. So, like, and it takes a little bit of reinforcement, but, like, let's say they want to take 30 minutes off their marathon time within one training block, and, well, I mean, I've had people do that, but it's like they're usually a little bit newer, right? But someone who's run, like, multiple and been at it in training anyway, if it's too unrealistic, I'll say, like, hey, I love where your vision is, but I'm going to put that in the vision bucket. Like, I feel like this is like that big picture vision. Where are you at right now? And I try to get them grounded. It's like, you know, so pointing them back into basic facts of things that they're doing in this moment. And then I will also say, like, hey, we're going to pull off as much as we possibly can, but I'm staring down 18 weeks and I'm thinking, the body, it's biological, time is an element. So what do you say we just commit to doing our absolute best and pulling as much time off of that as we possibly can in this next 18 weeks together? I had that actually very recently with a one-to-one athlete. Little bit different language I used with her, but still, you know, she's got really big goals, and I love that. And she just smashed her 5K PR, and she's about to do that in Indy for the half, too. But I'm like, I'm not ever gonna give you a guarantee on X time for your half, but what you will experience in training with us is that you pulled off more time than you ever, like, not necessarily that you ever thought you could, but more time than you have thus far. Like, it's like, I will get you so far along the way of improvement.

Yeah. Yeah, I also like to lean on the process versus outcome discussion in those conversations. Say, okay, well, let's set the outcomes aside for a second. What does the process look like? And let's ground in that. And what are the milestones we need to see in order to point to the outcomes we want? Race times, for example, workout times, in a sense of what paces can they run comfortably at the right efforts and paces. Say let's ground there. Let's ground in the process and let's let it reveal to us what's possible. Because, you know, you never want to... I'm someone who's always going to tell someone the truth, but as you said, you got to do it gently. You got to kind of sometimes massage it so that they don't get discouraged. But at the same time, you don't want somebody believing something can be done in a certain timeline when that's just unrealistic. And I've had to be blunt about that before sometimes. Direct maybe is a better word for it. And some people have liked that and some people haven't. And my sense on that, because I remember losing an athlete over a direct conversation about outcome goals. And that's one of those things. Well, it's like, okay, well, we just weren't a match, right? In terms of personality and vibe. And that's okay. That happens. Okay. Anything else on goal setting? I mean, obviously, we cover more in the book. We're hitting the surface today. If I were to bring it back to one reminder process. And I would add to that, because we didn't mention earlier, trying to be as metric based on the process as possible. And people talk about that with goal setting all the time. You know, and I love to talk about this with things like New Year's resolutions, like, okay, well, if you're gonna start a strength program in the new year, or start a strength program with a new training cycle, what does that mean? How many strength sessions are you going to do a month or a week? And how does that add up over the whole training cycle? You know, 18 weeks to a week. That's 36 potential strength sessions. How many of those are you going to do? Because you're not going to probably do them all, right? Things come up, you get sick, you have schedule come up, or schedule issues pop up, whatever. But can you do 33 out of the 36? You know, a little more than 90% or 32? What is it? Create that contract with yourself that is tied to those process-based metrics versus just saying, oh, I'm going to run 40 miles a week. It's like, okay, well, create the plan for it. Map it out. Track it. This is actually one area where I like some of the habit tracking tools that people use and talk about. I'm not sure if we mentioned that in the book or not, but we have talked about it, I know, in the podcast. So I'm blending the two in my head. But these just habit tracking tools of, you know, how many runs are you going to do a week? How many strength sessions are you going to do a week? How many hours of sleep are you going to get? And creating habit tracking grids in a journal, something you could see physically that allows you to track your progress. And you're not going to be perfect, and that's okay. So don't expect yourself to be, but give yourself that visual that allows you to see it. And some people can do it digitally, but I think doing it where you're actually writing it out on paper is really helpful. Because it is interesting how sometimes people have a mismatch between what they're doing and what they think they're doing. So anyway. All right. So there we go. No plan B, process over outcome goals, and then the right amount of stretch. Those are kind of the three themes we're going to hit on with goal setting. And then we'll start to wrap this episode, but first couple notes, announcements. One, this is your second to last episode, recording with me as co-host, which is sad. But it's sort of something we knew was always coming, in a sense. And so, yeah, the podcast will be trucking along as normal, but with slightly different texture to it as you step away, which is sad for me, because I thought we've made a good team. But I... And I appreciate all the energy you bring, but we're going to get some new voices involved and also have some solo me episodes again, which people may not want, but they're getting it.

Yeah, it's been a lot of fun. And I think it's so cool to have like tucked in and jumped in with the book going through the chapter. So that's been so much fun.

The biggest thing to me is that you have helped me reinvigorate my passion for this project. The book, you know, you were involved with that, but that became a good outline for these conversations over the last six months. But having a partner in crime kind of helped reinvigorate some of my enjoyment for doing this and bring some new energy and excitement to it. So thank you for that.

Yeah, of course.

It will be different, but we're still going to keep going. And like I said, bring in some new faces here and there and have some solo episodes. So stay tuned on that. Also, as a reminder, as always, you could still catch us on Fridays 2 p.m. for our Q&A on the at Rogue Running Instagram. You can also check out our website if you're looking at training and coaching options in Dallas, Austin areas or virtually wherever you are. You can also email us, coaching at Rogue Running, if you have any questions about any of those options. And I think that covers it. You guys go get your vision boards done, your goals set and we'll talk to you next week.