Hey, everybody, welcome to episode 349 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung. I'm glad to be back with you today. After a couple weeks away, I had some spring break travel, and then I lost my voice last week because of a head cold, but it's all back and I'm excited to be back with you. Today I'm going to get to some athlete questions. These are questions that I've either gotten from listeners or questions that I've seen pop up in my coaching across my in-person group or my podcast group or just general questions I've gotten from athletes that have come up regularly. So I'm not singling anybody out here. Most of these have been asked of me a few different times over the last month or so, and I know they must be on many people's minds, especially given that we've got spring races coming up here soon. So I'm going to get to five different athlete questions and hopefully answer some questions along the way that you guys might have as listeners as well. We're going to be talking about everything from how to deal with a bad workout to how to know whether or not you should do a shorter taper or longer taper prepping for your A-race. So we'll get to that in just a second. A few things before we jump in. First of all, I want to of course thank my sponsor for this episode, John G. John G. Running Apparel. They've now been a partner of mine for almost a year, and it's been amazing working with them. I'll be talking more about them mid-episode and give you of course a discount code to use if you want to check them out. So thanks John G for sponsoring. Also a couple of other show announcements before we jump in. And I think these are fun ones. Number one, I actually just recently hit three million downloads for the podcast about a month ago. So big milestone for me. Each of those million download milestones is a big one. It's a sign of relevance and longevity. But more than that, for me, it's a sign that people actually are listening, and that I'm actually able to help people through this medium. And I really appreciate that. And I also appreciate all of those who listen and follow along. It motivates me to keep going. Hopefully I'm able to have an impact by the words that I share and the coaching advice that I share through this podcast. The downloads are evidence of that. And I appreciate all of you for listening. And thank you for helping me celebrate this pretty cool milestone in the podcast world. Second, related to this show, I wanted to actually let you know about some opportunities to interact with me and get to know more about not only our coaching philosophy, but also options for training with us if you're interested in that. So we're actually gonna be hosting two different workshops. These workshops are gonna be centered around the idea of how to run your first or best half marathon or marathon. We're gonna do one in-person in Austin, and we're gonna do one virtually. These are capped at 15 people each because I wanna be able to have quality interactions with everyone there and try to get to know everybody and get people's questions answered and things like that. So we're gonna cap the numbers for each of these workshops. If we have more interests than perhaps anticipated, we'll add workshops, we'll do more of these, but we're gonna do one in person in Austin on April 20th, that's a Saturday, at 8:30 a.m. at Rogue. We're gonna do a short run together and then do a workshop and Q&A. And then we'll do a virtual one as well on 4.24, that's a Wednesday. That will be virtual via Zoom at 6:30 p.m. So 4.20 Saturday in Austin in person at 8:30 a.m. at Rogue at our Pressler location. And then Wednesday, 4.24 for a virtual option at 6:30 p.m. Central. So if you want to join either of those, then send me an email, chris at roguerunning.com, that's C-H-R-I-S at rogue, R-O-G-U-E, running.com to indicate your interest and get locked in. We're gonna limit each to 15 people, no more than 15 people. 15 people, again, if we have more interest, then I know what to do with, we'll start to add sessions, but I wanna start with that. 15 people, Saturday, April 20th, here in Austin, 8:30 a.m. at Rogue, or virtually on Wednesday, April 24th, at 6:30 p.m. Central Time. So please, if you're interested, email me chris at roguerunning.com. Would love to host you in one of those sessions. And I should say, if you're interested, please email me right away, because I think those will fill up quickly. But we shall see. But yeah, once you listen, if you're interested, jump on, email me, and we'll get you locked in for it. Q&A. Let's jump into my Q&A for today. These are all questions I've gotten from athletes recently that have either been from listeners directly or thematic in some of my coaching across the different groups that I touch. So we're going to start with this first question, which is basically, what about paces and can I go too slow? What about paces and can I go too slow? So this question comes up in the context of people talking about paces and evolving paces. And in particular, I think I've seen this theme where people are having a naturally fast evolution in their workout paces. And if you do the math and follow the rules of thumb on easy run paces, that that would naturally imply that your easy runs are potentially getting faster as well, which could be true. But it may not, and it may in fact be better for you to keep it all slow. And so the question really bubbling underneath this is, can I go too slow? Short answer is no, but let's break it down a little bit first. So, when we talk about easy run paces, when I give people rules of thumb about easy runs, I tell them to run their easy runs, which should be medium long runs, easy long runs, and any other easy runs that aren't recovery runs. I encourage people to do those at a minute slower than marathon pace or slower, or a minute and a half slower than half marathon pace or slower. Key underlined words there are or slower. And so, yes, there may be a time and a place where you're running an easy run at a minute slower than marathon pace, and that's comfortable and conversational for you, but there may be times where it's not, particularly in the approaching summer months. So, yes, those are the rules of thumb. Easy runs are typically a minute slower than marathon pace or slower. And then, importantly, recovery runs, those days after your quality workouts and after your long runs are even slower than that. And I typically recommend two minutes slower than marathon pace or two and a half minutes slower than half marathon pace or slower for your recovery runs. But it's really important to underscore the fact that you can do those runs slower if that's the right effort that you need in order to achieve your purpose for the day, which is about either aerobic capacity building in the case of those easy runs, or it might primarily be about recovery and creating movement, which promotes blood flow, which promotes healing for those recovery days. And by the way, there's also an aerobic benefit to that. If you need more information on why we go slow, then go listen to episode 306, where I really underscore all the reasons behind it. But it's absolutely critical to embrace that in your journey. And as you progress in paces for workouts, recognize that I would rather you still air on the conservative side on your easy runs, rather than be too aggressive on those days. Because what happens when we're too aggressive on those days, or we get a little ahead of ourselves, so to speak, is that we end up in the wrong aerobic zone potentially, where we're not getting the full aerobic capacity building benefit or recovery benefit. And also, we put more stress on the neuromuscular and the musculoskeletal systems, which can then lead to injury. So especially as you're progressing your workout paces, I want you to air on the conservative side, hang out on easy runs where you've always been. Find that you're going to find more benefit from that, versus thinking, oh, I have to press the limit on all these things. I have to increase my paces for 5K pace, 10K pace, half marathon pace, marathon pace, as I progress in my fitness. And also, I have to increase my paces on my easy days in order to get the benefit of this new level of fitness that I'm at. And I want you to release that expectation completely and instead air on the conservative side, polarize those easy runs, go the same paces you've always gone, or maybe even slower, so that you can really focus on those benefits gained by those once-a-week qualities that are now at faster paces. And you're going to be able to do more as a result. You're also going to be safer when doing it, and therefore more consistent, which will then promote a longer term fitness trajectory than if you just press on all fronts. So keep that in mind, you can't go too slow, full stop. And that also, by the way, means that if you have a crew that you normally run with that runs easier than you or at slower paces, it's okay. Run with them. In fact, that's a great forcing mechanism to keep you in those easy conversational places. Because what I would love it is if you finish an easy run, you finish a long run, you finish a medium long run, and you think, man, I feel great. I feel better at the finish than at the start because I've taken it so easy. I've been talking the whole time. I've been hanging out, haven't been pressing at all. And therefore, the body feels good. And it feels like it's gotten all the benefits of that aerobic work without taxing the chassis, the bones and muscles as much as if you had gone faster. So, you can't go too slow. Embrace that concept. That will allow you to get more out of your quality days. That will allow you to get more out of your race days. And that will allow you to get more out of those longer, long runs when they come. So, that's essentially question number one. What do I do about my easy run paces as I progress in my workout paces? The answer is still the same. You can't go too slow. Please err on the conservative side. That's question number one. Question number two. What do I do about bad days? What do I do about bad days, and should I worry? This has come up in a few instances recently where someone's had a big final workout. They're in their race-specific peaking mode, and they have intense workouts during the week. We have perhaps some long run workouts with rigor in them. And for whatever reason, those haven't gone well. And there's a tendency, and I understand this tendency completely, to want to extrapolate that bad day to race day and say, oh, because this went badly, then I'm not going to be ready for race day. And I want to make sure that we talk about this in a way that allows us to disconnect workout outcomes from race outcomes because they aren't necessarily related. But before we get there, I want to quickly talk about and kind of break down some of the different categories of bad days because there are bad days where you just feel sluggish and it feels hard to hit the paces, but maybe you still get 80 to 90% of the work in. It's just not quite as sharp as you would want. There are also bad days where you just miss almost completely on all of it for whatever reason. You're in a funk, you didn't sleep well, stress, didn't eat well. Maybe there's other factors going on, and you just lay an egg on the workout altogether. So that's another example. And then of course, there's those situations where you're having chronic bad days, where maybe it's not just one workout, but it's a couple and they're starting to stack up. And that last category is the one I worry about. The other ones, as a coach, truthfully, whether you have an 80, 90% day or you have just a whiff of a day where you only hit 15%, those days I don't worry about so much if they're one-offs. First of all, as a coach, in general, my philosophy is that there are no bad days. There are just days where you get the work done and you take your lessons from it. And as long as you're learning, then we can build on it. So generally, I prefer that people take the concept of bad days out of their vocabulary altogether. And that's not me being overly positive. It's just the reality of someone who has coached thousands of runners over the course of about 20 years. I don't tend to see high correlations between one-off bad days and race day outcomes, not only in the athletes I coach, but also in myself, where I've had those situations, where I've had bad workouts, I've had bad final race preps or long-run workouts, and then I've had great race days. I've also had perfect long-run workouts and then bad race days. They're not necessarily a one-off bad day in a workout. It's not necessarily correlated to any outcome on race day, if it's truly a one-off. And so having not seen any pattern there over thousands of coached runners, I know that it's not important or it doesn't matter if it happens. And so then the question becomes, okay, well, what can I do with it? And that's really just take the lessons you can take from it and move on. And sometimes there aren't really any great lessons, but oftentimes there are. And I think those 85, 90% days are the most valuable days, maybe even more valuable than perfect days, because you have to work, you have to struggle, you end up in that headspace where you're mentally battling a little bit. And man, there is nothing better in training than getting both physical stimulus as well as the mental stimulus of race day, which can sometimes be hard to recreate. So those tough days, I actually like a lot as a coach, because I think it prepares us not only physically, but also to deal with the mental challenges of race day. So then again, the question becomes, what are the lessons to take away? Do not extrapolate it to race day. Do not think for a second that it implies anything about what's going to happen with your performance. But instead, put it behind you and just simply carry forward with you the lessons that you can take forward into training or maybe into race day about things that you can put to work for you, full stop. And I think that's true, by the way, even if you have a 15% day, if it's a one-off, then no big deal. Write it off, move on, don't generally try to make up for it. We can't usually in a race-specific phase move things around that easily in order to fit it in somewhere else. And so generally, I tell people to move on. Sometimes there's little tiny nuance things that we can do to quote make up for something, but it should be relatively minor, and it should not be a situation of, hey, I want to repeat this workout on another day. I think in the history of my coaching, I've never actually had someone do that, is miss on a day and then come back and try to make it up fully. Doesn't make sense usually, especially in this race-specific phase. Instead, you put it behind you, you take whatever lessons you can from it, you try to get healthy, recovered, rested, so that you can then finish the work. Because it's the body of work that matters, it's not that one-off workout or that one bad day that matters. So those are the cases of a bad day, one bad day, whether you're 85%, 90%, or whether you're 15%. Now, if you're stringing together bad days, and usually from my perspective, the time when that becomes a problem is if we're going on three or four big days that just don't feel good consecutively, and by big days, I mean workouts and long runs, where it's not just a week worth of long runs that feel bad, it's getting into a week and a half, two weeks worth of long runs and workouts that just feel bad, feel sluggish for whatever reason. And then we have to ask ourselves, why are we in this situation? Because you potentially might be in a situation where you're overtrained, under recovered, maybe we've overcooked things, and we need to actually get you back to a place of recovery so that you can build again or so that you can get the most out of your race day. Those are the trickiest situations, but to be honest, at least in my coaching experience, they are more rare that those types of things happen. If you're balancing things well in training, typically you don't get to that place. But if you do get there, then I do think you have to pull back a little bit more dramatically in your training in order to actually sharpen up and feel fresh for race day. And what that looks like is going to vary significantly based on the individual, based on the situation, based on what your race day might look like. And so I hesitate to give too much specific guidance there. But in those situations, you need to fully reassess what you're doing and find a way to get to a strong and healthy place again, which means significantly reducing intensity, perhaps keeping the routine there, but significantly reducing the intensity so that you can feel fresh again. It might also mean intervening with a little bit of a doctor or blood work to try to figure out if there's some underlying issue from a blood work perspective that's holding you back. Assuming you're doing everything else right from a training perspective, your runs are easy enough, you're balancing stress and rest appropriately, you're fueling well, assuming you can answer those questions affirmatively, then you may want to get an interventional blood work to see if there's some underlying anemia, iron issue, something like that. But that's where we gotta lean in and intervene more in order to figure out how to get you fresh and as sharp as possible on race day, which will mean definitely backing off from training so that you can hopefully give yourself a chance to be sharp and fresh on race day. So that's the scenario where if you're stacking bad days over a couple of weeks, you may have a challenge or a problem. If it's just a one-off bad day, take your lessons and move on. Keep in mind that it's the body of work that matters. It's not just one workout. And in all of my experience as a coach, I've seen plenty of people have one-off bad days and then go crush on race day. So it's not something as a coach that I worry about in the least. I understand as an athlete, it's hard to have that mentality, but I'm telling you, I'm giving you permission to have that mentality, by answering this question here on the podcast today. So that's number two. What do I do about bad days? Number three, shifting gears completely to a listener question that I actually got in my Instagram DMs. This comes from listener Tessa. Thanks for the question, Tessa. She said, we'd love to hear about dog safety while running. I've had too many close encounters with loose dogs. Should I carry pepper spray or perhaps a taser? Interesting question. I can tell you, as someone who has lived in Texas, who has lived in rural parts of Texas, who has run in rural parts of Texas, who has run in rural parts of other countries like Mexico, it's a fear I have for sure, because I've definitely had some too close encounters with dogs. I've never actually been bitten, but I've had some scary situations where I felt like I might get bit. So I totally understand and relate to the question, Tessa. And I'm going to give you an answer to the extent that I can based on my personal experience. I'm not a vet, I'm not a dog expert, but I've talked to some about this topic, and this is how I personally approach it and what I would recommend. And first of all, I would just say to the dog owners out there, be good owners, put your dogs on leashes, control them, don't assume they're going to be nice to others just because they're nice to you. I can't tell you how many times I've had dog owners tell me, oh, he won't hurt you. And I just want to say back, no, he wouldn't hurt you. He might hurt me because I'm a stranger in this situation. And I've had dogs that look seemingly innocuous around their owner suddenly turn into dogs that want to bite you when you're someone that's somehow foreign to them. So dog owners, please put your dogs on leashes, watch your dogs, and don't assume they're going to be nice to others just because they're good dogs at home or good dogs with you. But to answer your question, Tessa, one thing I do think about when I'm preparing for runs in situations where I might be worried about dogs is that I do think you have to consider the context of the situation and what types of dog encounters you might run into. And for me, this will vary, depending on where I'm running and what's going on. If I'm here in Austin and I'm running around my neighborhood, it's gonna look different than if I'm in a rural part of Texas or I'm in a rural part of Mexico where I travel a lot and I can encounter dogs. And the reason I say that is because I do think the threats from animals are different depending on the context. You know, there are some rural parts of the world where you have dogs that travel in packs and they're, in a sense, predatory, and they will hunt in packs, and they'll, you know, they have a hunger for blood, so to speak, and they go out and attack people in packs. And if you run into a situation where you're up against a pack of dogs that operates that way, that's gonna be a really difficult situation no matter what your strategy might be. And then, of course, in other contexts, it might be about avoiding dogs that have owners because I find often in rural situations where I'm not worried about packs of dogs, the dogs that are feral tend to be fine and innocuous because they see humans all the time or they're perhaps relying on humans for food, giving them random food. It's the dogs that have owners and have property to protect or an owner to protect that are the ones you have to worry about. So I do think context matters. And above all else, the goal should be to avoid encounters with dogs that might be threatening. And so knowing your environment and your context, I think matters as a starting point. There are parts of Texas, for example, that are more rural, where I'll be running on farm roads, and I know that there are animals on certain properties that aren't leashed or that might be able to jump a fence. And in particular, there's an area where I run sometimes where there's a pit bull that really is protective of the house and typically isn't leashed. And I want to avoid that pit bull at all cost. And so in those situations, I will very much craft my route in order to avoid the situations that might put me face to face with a dog that might find me as a threat and want to attack. So I think step one is knowing your context and trying to avoid those situations where you might run into a dangerous animal if at all possible. And by the way, if I think if there's a threat of packs of dogs that might be predatory, that's an area where I just won't run in there. I have been in situations where that might be true and I'll just find a treadmill or not run in those situations because that type of situation is extremely dangerous and probably not one the tactics are going to help you solve if you happen to run into that situation. Beyond that, again, avoid. Avoid, find ways to run in areas where you don't think there will be dogs. And step two here is having a strategy for how to deal with animals. When you do encounter them, if you're worried about your safety, one of the things I do is always assume that an animal might attack me, even if it's leashed and it's running close enough to me or I'm running close enough to it where it might get me. So I always assume that an animal could potentially be dangerous or even lash out or nip at me even if the dog is on leash. So when I encounter a dog that's on leash, I will always take and give it a wide berth because you never know how movement past it might provoke it, even if it's the nicest looking dog. And I've had owners tell me, oh, you know, you didn't have to do that. He's super nice. It's like, okay, fine. But in any situation where I see a dog, I'm going to give it a wide berth if it's leashed. If it's off leash, and it's just me and the dog, then I'm going to stop. That's step one. Stop. Not look threatening. You don't want to turn your back to it in any way. So you don't want to look threatening, and you also don't want to look like you're running. Because if you run away from a dog, the dog will probably chase you. So stop. Face the dog. Don't necessarily give it eye contact, because that can be viewed as aggressive behavior for a dog. But you want to calmly speak to it. It's kind of like you do with a black bear. Hey bear, hey bear, hey dog. It's okay, dog, hey dog. So calmly speak to it, and then slowly back away to get out of its space. Because usually when dogs get aggressive, they're protecting something. They're protecting property, perhaps, their home. They're protecting their owner. So if you slowly back away while still facing the dog, speaking to it calmly, not giving an eye contact, but looking in its direction, and slowly step away until you can get safely away. And then sometimes in those situations, the dog will back off and start to look disinterested or turn away once you get out of its space. Sometimes not, in which case, I wouldn't start moving quickly or running away from that dog until that dog is out of sight. So those are the ways I've been able to avoid getting bitten or avoid an attack in the past. But obviously, there may still be situations where the dog keeps coming, in which case, Tessa, if you're still worried about it, then I would recommend pepper spray. I would not recommend a taser. I think a taser is going to be difficult. And if you decide to use pepper spray, then I would make sure you know how to use it and practice using it so you don't end up somehow spraying yourself versus a dog. But hopefully, that's a last resort. So those are my tips. Avoid, number one, if you can, be aware of your circumstances. Two, create that space. And three, if you do encounter a dog that looks threatening, make sure you approach it the right way by not looking aggressive, but still being assertive and then slowly backing away and creating space between you and that animal until you can safely get away. So those are my tips. Those are the things that have worked for me in the past. Hopefully, that's helpful to you. Okay, that was number three. Before we get to number four, I want to talk about my partnership with John G. Running Apparel. It's beautiful, functional running apparel. That is all season. They just released their spring line. It's amazing. There's two cool things, at least two cool things, that are cool about John D. Running Apparel. First of all, their designs are based on partnerships with artists in different places around the world to highlight local colors and styles and culture. And then, of course, 2% of all revenue goes to support water projects all around the world. So it's truly a brand that helps you look good, feel good on the run, but also feel good because you're giving back to a great cause. They also have their five-year run everywhere guarantee, so this stuff lasts. And if it doesn't, you can send it back, and they will replace it with no questions asked. So I want you to go to their website, runjonji.com, get some stuff. I've got a code for you. It's just Rogue for 10% off, R-O-G-U-E, 10% off your first order, your second order, your fifth order, your 15th order. So go check it out, runjonji.com, code Rogue, R-O-G-U-E for 10% off. Okay, let's get to question number four on my list here. Number four is, and this is marathon-specific, but I'm going to make it specific to marathons or half marathons. But the question is, should I do a two- or three-week taper for a marathon? And to relate that to the half, I'd say should I do a one- or two-week taper for a half? Before I jump in to answering the question, I would point you to episode 244, which is an episode entirely on the taper phase of training, where I talk about all the things to consider and think about in a taper, even talk about the answer to this question a little bit. But I want to first say that for those that aren't sure or newer to those distances, the half marathon or the marathon, I think it's a pretty good standard rule to start with a three-week taper for a marathon and a two-week taper for a half marathon. In fact, for, I don't know, 90% plus of the runners I coach, those general rules of thumb seem to work well, seem to end up with good race day outcomes. And keep in mind, we're tapering because we want to take all the hard work that we've done and we want to pull back volume and a little bit of intensity so that we can feel fresh and ready for race day. So you're essentially allowing your body to consolidate all that fitness you gained in training so that you can put it all out, put your best foot forward on race day when it matters. And these rules of thumb for the half and the full are pretty old, pretty tested, pretty tried and true. Three weeks for the marathon, two weeks for the half, I think is a pretty good starting place for those that aren't sure or that need a starting place. Now, for those that are maybe more experienced, that are curious about whether or not to shift from a three week to a two week taper or a two week to a one week taper for a half, then I think it becomes a question of what do you think your body needs to peak and be its best self on race day. And part of the reason I ask you to trust your instincts here is because this is a hard thing to test out and try out. You don't get that many chances. It's not like you're running that many marathons a year or that many marathons over a couple of years. And so you only get a few opportunities to really try this. And so it's not like something, this is something you can test every week in your long run, like long run nutrition. It's something that you only get a few opportunities a year to potentially test. And so it's hard to, and it seems like a pretty big gamble to play with it that much. And so I ask you to test your instincts and ask yourself some questions. And personally, as someone who has been in this journey for a long time, one thing I've come to know about myself as a runner is that I tend to do better in general in workouts on race day, for shorter race day, at higher mileage levels. My body responds when it has more mileage under its belt, so to speak, versus when I have lower mileage, I tend to feel stiff and not fluid. And for whatever reason, I find trouble hitting paces. And so I began to experiment with this probably 15 years ago with my own running journey where I started to say, you know what, I think I might actually do better on a shorter taper. So I've had the opportunity now to experiment with a two-week marathon taper for me, and a one-week to 10-day marathon taper, or half marathon taper. And I've found that that, over time, has worked better for me than if I do a full three-week or two-week taper. That's just me. That is an individual situation, and I don't necessarily think others can apply it to themselves. But again, there are some signs and rules of thumb I think you can look at, and one is, do I tend to do better on higher mileage? And as we talk about this, I want to emphasize the idea that when I'm talking about, do I do better on higher mileage, I'm talking about, do I do physically better on higher mileage? Because I know there's a mental component to the taper that's really challenging, where everybody's thinking, oh, I want to do more, I want to do more, I'm losing, I'm losing, I'm losing, so I need to do more. And so if mentally you think you need higher mileage, then that's not necessarily the reason for doing it. I want you to physically be responding to that in order to really justify shorting that taper, because if it's just the mental part, we can deal with the mental part in a different way. And I talk about dealing with some of those taper crazies in that episode on the taper phase, episode 244, so you can go check that out. But look, taper madness, taper crazies, that is absolutely real. And if you want to shorten your taper to deal with them, that's really not the reason to do it. You want to do it because physically you think it will actually be better for you. And the question there is, do I do better with higher mileage? And one way to test this in a mini way in advance of race day or in advance of entering the taper phase is by how you manage your down weeks. In general, our training approach has a two up week, one down week flow where you go in two up weeks where you're working hard, your peak volume, and then you take a down week, which is typically 20%, 25% lower volume, and then you get back into the up weeks. One way to test this in a many way is to play with that down week volume a little bit. How do you do on a 10% or 15% reduction in your down week volume versus a 20 or 25% reduction? If you tend to do better with the higher reduction, meaning you bounce back stronger on those up weeks, then that's a sign that you probably need a three week taper. If you tend to do better on lower mileage reductions in those down weeks, and consistently that proves out over the course of a cycle, then that's a sign that maybe a two week taper is relevant for you in the marathon or one week in the half marathon. So I think that's the most important variable, is trusting your instincts on how you handle volume reductions, and then you just have to go and try it out. And I know that seems risky in the context of a marathon because you're only getting one chance to practice that during a marathon cycle. But if you're into this for the long haul and you're in this for a multi-year journey or a decade plus journey, then you're going to have plenty of chances to test it out. So trust your instincts first, and then go test it out, and then ask yourself honestly, how did you feel afterwards? And if you felt good, then stick with it. If not, go back to the three week approach. You could also test it out with perhaps a little bit less risk, so to speak, in the half marathon. And if you find that a one week taper for a half does better for you than a two week taper, then that might be a sign that a two week taper instead of a three week taper will work better for you in the marathon. So those are some things to consider, but the overarching question is, how do I handle volume and volume reductions? And be honest with yourself about that. That's question number four. Question number five, and I'll ask this in a paraphrased version, which is, is your training too easy or is your training too hard? It's funny, I've actually gotten both of those questions on each end of the spectrum over the last couple of months. I've had people wondering about that on both ends of the spectrum, which is kind of nuts. But the answer is, in many ways, sometimes it's easy, sometimes it's hard. That's the power and magic of polarization. So maybe I should take it as a compliment. Some people, though, getting into the specifics, they hear me talk about running super slow, super easy most of the time, and they think on the outside that maybe my training is not rigorous enough because I'm always telling people to slow down or run easy. And I think those that actually run in my groups either in person in Austin or virtually in the Renegades would probably laugh at that because they know that those easy days are there for a reason so that they're appropriately balanced with the hard days. And then there are some that do train with me that ask myself, is your training too hard? Sometimes it seems like it could be too much because of the challenge of some of the things that we do. For example, we had our Boston Simulator big long run workout this past weekend, and that is a point to point simulator run where we run from North Austin to South Austin to simulate the downhills of Boston, and we have four mini Newton Hills along the way where people are having to run marathon effort through those hills, and then they finish with mile repeats at the track. It's a tough workout, but one that I've done for many years, and people actually tend to crush, and then that builds confidence heading into race day because if they can do that, they can do anything. And so the answer is, no, I don't think my training is too easy, and no, I don't think it's too hard. But we do do hard things for a reason. We don't just do hard things superfluously so that we can brag about it or so that I can brag to others about how hard my workouts are, my training is. It's all with a purpose appropriately balancing both the stress of the work to build fitness and the rest to recover and allow that fitness to thrive. And so, you know, that polarization is key where you should be running super easy on your easy days. You can't go too slow, as I said, answering the first question from today's episode. But also you have to balance that with rigor, with real work. One of the things that I commit to my athletes is that I'll never give them something that's too challenging for them. It'll be something they're prepared for based on the things that we've built with them to get them ready for that work. I'll never give them something that I wouldn't do myself. I wouldn't incorporate into my own training. I would also never give them something that didn't have a purpose. Everything we do has a purpose, whether that be to build race day preparation by running race pace on a challenging course that mimics the course. That is the one you'll face on race day. It might mean doing Hills in training or challenging hilly runs because that helps build that eccentric strength that's going to make you strong over a rolling course or downhill course, or because it helps build power that will make you faster when you're actually running on a flat course. So there are reasons that we do everything. It all has a purpose. We do do things that I like to call anything workouts, which is a workout that might be particularly challenging. Appropriately, I should say, challenging, meaning you're prepared for it. But it is tough. It is hard because when you do it, regardless of whether it went perfectly or not, you can then look back and say, hey, if I can do that, I can do anything. And so having that rigor, I think is critical to getting your goals. And I'm one who believes that regardless of your pace, regardless of where you fit in the pack, you're worthy of doing rigorous things. And if you do rigorous things, then you're going to get big goals. That's the way it works. So is my training too easy sometimes? Is my training too hard? It's appropriately hard, but it's all about finding that balance in between, because ultimately my goal as a coach is to help anyone I work with get their goals, and I'm going to build training accordingly. I'm also very self-critical, meaning that if I think something's not helping or productive or I need to change something, I'll change it, because I'm not here to make myself look good or sound smart. I'm here to actually help people get their goals, and I take that so, so, so seriously. And so the answer is yes and sometimes it's easy, because it should be and it needs to be so that you can do the hard things when it counts and when it matters. So there you go. My last question, is my training too hard or too easy? Well, I think it's appropriately balanced. But thanks to all of you who have either indirectly or directly contributed to this episode. As a reminder, if you want to join me for a workshop on training, especially as we approach the fall training cycle here that for us kicks off in the May-June timeframe, you can join us on one of those workshops in Austin on Saturday, April 20th at 830 a.m. or virtually via Zoom on April 24th. That's a Wednesday at 630 p.m. Central. Please email me, chris at roguerunning.com, if you want to sign up, do that ASAP. Thanks for listening. Otherwise, as always, you can check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Twitter, Instagram, or Facebook. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon. Thank you.