Hey, everybody, it's Chris with the Running Rogue podcast. I'm joined with Steve, as always. Hey, Steve.

How's it going, Chris?

Today, we're excited to be starting a mini series of sorts on The Boston Marathon. The Boston Marathon's coming up on April 17th, 2017, Marathon Monday. We are excited about it. We've got a big group of Rogues, 50 plus, headed up to Boston. So we thought we'd do a little two-part series on The Boston Marathon and give you some of its history, talk about race strategy, and then also come back in our second episode and talk about some stories, some heartwarming and inspiring stories from the great history that is The Boston Marathon. So I'm excited about this. Aren't you, Steve?

I'm super excited about it. It's only four weeks out from Boston at this point. We've got all of our athletes for the last two weeks have been getting into their very, they're deep now into their very specific marathon phase. We started that about two weeks ago. A lot more volume, a little more marathon-specific work, and definitely working our hill angles on from up and down. So I think this is perfect timing. If you're not excited about what's going on in Boston Marathon every spring, then I don't really think you're a marathoner.

Yeah, your athletes just ran 30 miles this past Saturday for their long run, and then today had a tough workout on a Thursday doing three by five K at marathon pace or faster. And so yes, those are usually spring signals at Rogue that Boston is coming.

Yeah, and we're coming up to our most specific Boston simulation run where we utilize the wonderful Mount Pinell Balcony's Mayfield Park loop. We call it the Laguna Gloria loop where we do that a couple of times to try to really get the body ready to run a little slower coming downhill or getting your body pitch correct and also to work on understanding what your marathon goal pace is when you're coming down a hill and how to adjust. So we'll be talking about a lot of those specifics today. Excited about that. And again, you know, it's like when I used to feel about when I was in high school, when I could smell people mowing the lawn, I knew it was track season. Now you start feeling a little bit of the heat in central Texas and you're like, okay, here we go, Boston time.

It's getting close. Okay, so again, this is episode 14. We're gonna cover this in two episodes. When this one comes out, it's gonna be March 20th, which will be four weeks out from race day. And then we'll be releasing another one the week before on April 10th, a week before the 17th. This series and this first, we're gonna get a little bit on Boston history, some fun facts you may not know about the race. And we're gonna talk about some way too early elite field predictions that Steve and I have put together, which we'll come back to you in the second episode of the series. And then we're gonna spend the bulk of the time today talking about preparing for Boston, both pre-run and how you handle the logistics of that weekend, as well as what should your race strategy be so that you can start to prepare for those that might still be in their final several weeks of training. We want you to be able to prepare for it. So that's today, and then we'll come back the next episode, and we're gonna spend it exclusively on getting you inspired by Boston and sharing some famous stories and histories and inspiration that comes from the race and its storied history. So that'll be our series. But as I said, today, we're starting off with some Boston history and facts. And with that, I've got for you, and I'd love to get your reactions as we go through these, Steve. I've got four did you know Boston facts that I wanna share with people. The first one happens to be about the history or the length of the race. This will be the 120th running of The Boston Marathon this year. It started in 1897, which was a year after the first modern day Olympics in 1896, where they had a 40K distance marathon. But this will be the 120th running of the Boston, and Boston is the oldest continuously run marathon period in the world. And in North America, it happens to be, this is the kind of fun fact, it happens to be the second oldest road race, continuously run road race in North America. The Buffalo New York Turkey Trot beat it by a little bit. It had the Thanksgiving prior to the first Boston is when the Buffalo New York Turkey Trot started. So Boston's oldest continuously run marathon, but only the second oldest continuously run race. As a part of that, there were, interestingly, there's only four of major sporting events in the US that have been continuously run through both World Wars. Some of the marathons, like New York, took a break during the World Wars or part of the World Wars because of the chaos of all of that. Boston went all the way through. There were three other sporting events that continued. One was the Kentucky Derby. Another was the Rose Parade and the Rose Bowl from college football fame. And then the last is the famous dog show that I think was just recently on television. So there you go.

Those are some pretty big ones right there. You got four American institutions basically. The Westminster Dog Show, right?

Sorry, I'm not up on my dog trivia. But yes, the Westminster Dog Show, it was one of those that went through the World Wars as well. So 1897, 120 years of this race, so much history. The second fun fact I wanted to share was the first Boston was actually run as a 24.5 mile race from Ashland to Boston. The Olympics the previous year was actually 40K. So they modified the distance slightly based on where they wanted the finish line. So that was 24.8 miles. Boston chose 24.5 miles from Ashland to Boston. And the first winner of Boston was a guy named John McDermott. He beat a field of 15 starters, 10 of which actually finished the race. And he finished that 24.5 miles in a time of two hours and 55 minutes. Which if you extrapolate out to 26.2 miles, turns into a 307, which means that those under 35 men that are qualifying at 305 or faster would actually have won the very first Boston ever raced.

That's pretty amazing right there.

So that's crazy. All right, so third fact I wanted to share is Boston is always held on Patriots Day, or at least it has a history of being held on Patriots Day. The first Boston was held on Patriots Day, April 19th in 1897. Patriots Day is a holiday celebrated in Massachusetts and Maine only to commemorate the start of the Revolutionary War with the Battles of Lexington and Concord. Paul Revere rode his horse on April 19th in 1775 to alert the Revolutionary War folks that hey, it's on. And so that's why Massachusetts celebrates Patriots Day. Interestingly, Patriots Day used to be a date. So it was April 19th every year. And that was true until 1968. And so if April 19th fell on a different day besides Monday, that's when the race was. So there were many, many Bostons that fell on Tuesdays and Wednesdays and Fridays. Every day except for Sunday, if the race, because Sunday was a day of rest in the Catholic traditions of the Sabbath, they would push it to the 20th if Patriots Day ever fell on a Sunday. But otherwise, it was run any other day of the week, including in 1968, which is the last year that it was run specifically on the 19th, Ami Birfoot of Runners World fame, won the race that year and he won it on a Friday. That year, they changed it from April 19th to the third Monday in April. So from 69 to today, it's always run on the third Monday in April, Marathon Monday, as we've come to know it. So there you go.

Big facts.

Now, the other notes on the Patriots Day point is that the very first Boston, because they were celebrating Patriots Day, they wanted to bring some of the inspiration from the reason for Patriots Day. So militiamen dressed as Revolutionary War militia actually rode alongside the racers and handed out lemons, water, and wet handkerchiefs to commemorate the day. So I'm not sure what they were doing, eating lemons.

Yeah, the other two make a whole lot of sense. Water and wet handkerchiefs could be very valuable. A little lemon in your mouth at mile 22. Not sure that that's really prescribed anymore for, I'm not sure if the coaches of the world or athletes of the world are really looking for their lemon. Maybe a lemon flavored gel. That's about as good as we're gonna get.

Lemon Gatorade.

Yeah, Lemonade Gatorade, yep, that could be.

So there you go. So then the fourth fact I wanted to share was the distance. So the first Boston, as I mentioned, was 24.5 miles. It wasn't until 1908 that the marathon became 26.2 miles at the London Olympics, but even subsequent marathons until 1921 were run at varied distances around 40K or close to 26 miles until the IAAF finally said, enough's enough, we're standardizing the distance. And in 1921, the IAAF codified 26.2 as the official distance, which had been run in 1908 at the Olympics, but six of the first seven Olympics all had different distances associated with them. And it wasn't until actually 1924 that Boston changed their course from starting in Ashland to going out to Hopkinton in order to get to that official 26.2 mile distance.

Yeah, it's super interesting. I did not know that, you shared that with me offline right before we got started. And that's pretty shocking to me to think that it took that long to sort of get it to that point. And again, I guess the distance that Phidippides had to run from the plains of Thermopylae, or whatever, Persepolis, or wherever he was to Athens to announce the gut-wrenching failure of the Athenian army, it's always been a little bit arbitrary. And I guess it kind of historically makes sense that early on it would be in the same way. But I wonder if those, and just kind of interesting just to think of the idea of the marathon as a rangy distance, as the things we call about just a generic race or a run or whatever else, it's now the marathon has such a, it's just in our minds at 26.2, period, and the ubiquity of seeing those stickers all over everywhere and then the 13.1 suddenly becoming this all-important race as well. It's intriguing and interesting to me how the human race creates interesting, the history of it is really interesting to me. Again, it's food for thought, probably not much food, but at least it's food for thought.

There's probably a lot of marathoners out there that wish at times running a marathon that it was still 24.5.

I'm sure you did last year.

All right, I certainly did when I did Boston last year. We'll get to my story later. But that's a little bit of history. Oldest continuously run race, second oldest continuously run road race in North America. Pretty cool. Now, let's get to some way too early elite predictions. We've talked about the elite field in Boston, but we're gonna talk about it again. And Steve and I both put together our predicted top three for the race, and we'll be updating this on the second episode as we get more information about some last minute race preps and how injuries might be playing out in the week prior. But I'm gonna give you my top three men marathoners, and then you give me yours, and then we'll talk about it, and then we'll switch to the women's side. So my prediction on the men's side is that we'll have two Ethiopians on the podium, including, I'm predicting that Lemmy Hale will repeat and come back around and win again.

You know how rare that is.

It's rare.

I think it's only happened one time, I believe.

So he's gonna be in rarefied air.

I mean, there have been multiple winners who have won the race, but never back to back, not to repeat.

Yes. So I'm predicting that Hale will win again, repeat champion Rupp will finish second. And then Hale's countryman, Seagay, will finish out the podium. So he actually finished on the podium last year as well.

Yeah, he did.

And so I'm kinda leaning on my predictions towards people with, at least at the top, with Boston experience. But give me your top three and then we'll talk about it.

All right, so I'm gonna go out on a big limb here and I'm giving Galen the win, because I think that this race will go slow enough for that to be the case. And this race seems to typically, at least over the last couple, the last 10 years or so, it seems to be an either out fast and roll race or a sit back and wait. Obviously been a few differences in there, but I think that either one of those plans still optimize Galen's opportunity for a win because the pace will not be the crucial thing. It will be a race. Whether or not he's going to be capable of being able to reel people in over the late part of the race, if it goes out fast, that's the one scenario. If the scenario is somewhere in between where the race is one and say 206, 207, I think that Galen will have a much harder time to win. But I think if the race goes, I don't see any way the race is gonna go faster than that anyway, so I think Galen's got a shot. So that's my first, my pick. And then I'm going for number two. My second place finisher, I'm picking, the Ethiopians have lately been pretty dominant at The Boston Marathon, as you indicated with your two in the top 10. I'm going with a different Ethiopian, though. I'm gonna go with Cisse Lemma, because this is a little bit of an off one, but he basically, my logic isn't exactly perfect, but he ran a 208 in Dubai, and I think he got third or fourth, and this was in January, so late January, January 20th in Dubai. I think he was third maybe, or somewhere in there. It might even have been second, but he, the winner just crushed the entire field, and I think he may have been laying up and waiting, and using that, as we sometimes use ourselves, as a sort of 15% slower sort of race up, as a way of getting some volume in, otherwise. Either that, or he was just going for a payday. Dubai is known for the payday scenario, but that's my pick for number two. And then number three, I'm going way out on a limb with Joffrey Karoui. Joffrey Karoui went 208 in Amsterdam. He was born in 93, so he's one of the younger runners in the entire field, and I think that we're about due for a new Kenyon on the block, and so I'm gonna pick him as my number three. Also, one of the things we wanna talk about here real quick is that neither one of you nor I picked the top four seeds in the race who are all exceedingly fast, all sub-205. In fact, the top, what is it, top basically 10 or almost eight or so are all sub-205 runners, but we didn't pick any of those guys to be the winner because in my mind, Boston is the perennial gamer's race, and I just think it's going to come down to that. And I do not think that Kometo, Mutai or Macau are going to have the skills, but if one of those three, if I get to throw another little prediction in and if one of those three does it, I'm going to go with Patrick Macau because I think he can race.

Yeah, Kometo is a current world record holder. He also has a DNF at Boston, the year of MEB won in 2014. So I agree with you. I think the fast-on-paper Kenyans, there's a combination of issues there. One is that they're used to paced races. Boston is not that. And the second is that a lot of their PRs, it's been a little while. So the questions of their current fitness start to come into play. Back to your point on Karui, I actually had him in my top four. He was kind of between him and Seagay for that podium spot. I think the other Kenyan that could challenge for the podium is Kit Wara. Similarly, kind of young guys, up and coming. Doesn't have the same history as some of the other guys, but might be a surprise.

I think it could be a year for a Kenyan flyer, and that's why I've got Karui in my list.

Okay, and so, and going to just recap, so for me, I went with the Ethiopians with Boston experience that seemed to have some more recent history. LemmeHale, who won Boston last year, he ran a 204 Dubai last year, so he's got both the race experience and the wheels and the PR to justify.

And that makes my argument for LemmeHale because he also ran Dubai, and it did not, seems to be a bit of a...

No, no, I'm talking about Dubai 2016, not 2017.

Right, but he did it the year he won.

Fair enough.

Right, so just like I'm calling LemmeHale, that in the same year, they both ran Dubai, and I think that might be, it could be that there's a plan there. I don't know who's coaching. These athletes necessarily, but it could be that there's some sort of consistency patterning going on there, because I noticed that too, that he had had a 2016 Dubai win. Now LemmeHale did not win, but he certainly could have been doing a layup, so we'll see.

And that's where I think Rupp's gonna struggle. When you get to that 22 to 26 point and you gotta have something left, and he's just not, he doesn't have the experience yet, and that course is significantly tougher than what he's run. So I think he'll have a good day, but I'm knocking him down just a little bit based on experience.

And I think that his coach is the consummate professional who will have him prepared for every section of that race course. Having run and won there, being his original stomping grounds. We're talking about Al Sal, Alberto Zalazar. I think that I'm gonna give him the tip, and I'm gonna go with Galen for my, I'm not typically an American flag waiver, stars and stripes guy necessarily all the time, but in this case, I just think if there's a chance, I think that one other thing, Meb, I just don't think it's gonna be possible.

I think Meb is gonna treat this like a victory lap.

As well he should, incredibly well earned.

All right, so that's the men's side. And we'll circle back on these predictions as we get about a week out, so that we can see what's going on with some of the prep races and injuries. Now let's switch to the women's side. I'm gonna let you start with your top three, and then I'll give you mine. Again, just give me the top three, then we can debate. Cool.

All right, so number one, Edna Kipligat. That's who I'm picking. She was 2016 third at Tokyo, 2016 second at Chicago. Guess what? It's time for a winner. She's gonna win at Boston. I think that while it is a pretty heavy race schedule, it's really not super heavy for a marathoner who's in her prime. And I think that Edna is, where we talked about the Ethiopians kind of being a little bit stronger on the men's side and having had some history over the last couple years. The women, on the women's side, the Canyons have been absolutely dominant. I'm going with the Canyon winner. Number two, I wanna give Desi a win, but I don't think Desi's just gonna be able to do it. I think that her seventh at Rio was an incredibly great race, but I just think she's not gonna be, I think she's just not gonna be good enough for the win, but I think she's super hungry for it. And I think they will have had all the stops pulled for her to be prepared for this race on this day. So I'm gonna pick Desi for number two. And number three, I'm gonna go with Gladys Cherono. She ran 219 in 2015. I think that she is currently the world number one, or in that ballpark range. She's definitely in the tops of the world marathon list this year going in. And I think that she's got a really good shot in that zone. I just think that Edna's not gonna be turned around. So those are my top three, Kipligat, Linden and Cherono.

Interesting, okay. Well, we had a little bit of overlap on Kipligat, but other than that, we're different. So I'm again predicting Ethiopian dominance. I'm just, I don't know, I want an Ethiopian kick here. We've got, I'm predicting Deva Bezanish. Deva will get the win. She has a prior Boston win, although not last year, and has the current course record. And so I'm giving her the edge because of the experience, and she definitely has the wheels because she ran 219 there when they went off crazy off the front with Shalane. Now she didn't win that year in 2014 because Jeptu ultimately was disqualified. So she was second that year, but she's got a history of-

She was, she should get the win.

But she has the win now. She's been credited with it since Jeptu has been disqualified. So she's the official winner and had a solid year, and now is the official course record holder for Boston in 219. So I'm predicting that she'll win, that her country woman who won last year will get second, and I'm gonna completely botch this name, but Atsita Besa, she ran a 222 last year for the win.

Again, she was just absolutely crazily, I mean, she was just a beast of a show.

She was, right, and she finished really strong. And again, so I'm kind of giving a nod to experience there. She also had another result that I don't have in front of me, but that was pretty impressive to follow that later in the fall. So I think she's, and she's younger, so she's up and coming. And then for third, I'm going with Kipligaht. I like her on the podium, and it wouldn't surprise me if she was one or two, as you mentioned, having her at one. But she's getting a little bit long in the tooth at 37. So I'm concerned that she's gonna be able to hang with the younger rabbits from Ethiopia. So I put her on the podium. But at the third spot, and unfortunately, I just don't see any scenario where Dez can get there. I think the challenge for Dez is I love how she races and that she runs her own race. I would imagine that she and Jordan, I say might end up together, potentially at some points running a similar rhythm. But I think it's really difficult, whether the race goes out fast, or whether the race goes out slow, to just run your rhythm and come from behind in the modern marathon. Now that could have worked five or six years ago. It almost worked in, I think it was 2012 or 13, when she got second. And so, but it's different now. It's different now. So I would love to see Desi on the podium. That would certainly make me happy, but I just don't see it happening.

Yeah, no harm, no foul. That's why we make these predictions. We'll see where we're at in a couple of weeks. If we get any closer, or get any more intel on people, we'll get more news output as we get closer to the race. We'll get more details on what's going on. Maybe we'll even get some rumors about where people's fitness is and where their injuries are. Honestly, I think, other than Galen's positioning in the men's race, I'm way more excited about what's gonna happen in the women's race. I think we're gonna see a great race. And the women do have a tendency at Boston, no matter what, to go for it. And I do think that plays in the Desi's hands a little bit. But again, if they do choose to go slow, like they did one year where Desi had to do the work, I think that was like two years ago, I think, 2015, wasn't it, when it was it? Or where Desi got to the front and had to do a good bunch of the work, and they just blew by her and left her in the dust. She just couldn't go with it. Yep.

And if anybody thinks we're crazy and has better ideas about this, please share and we'll talk about that on our second show in this series. All right, so with that as our intro, we're gonna dive into course strategy, talking both about pre-race planning and logistics, and then also how you break down the course itself, similar to how we broke down The Boston Marathon course several episodes back. One thing I'll point you to is episode five, where we talked about generic marathon race planning, sort of non-course specific. So I would definitely encourage you, if you're planning to run Boston, to listen to that, because you're gonna get some additional tips about running any marathon and how do you prepare for that, that we won't be talking about today.

But we will have very different, we'll have a very different description of what we think you should do for Boston. So yes, again, go back there and read that. But it's also really good. I think it's one thing that's really cool, Chris, is that doing this podcast, we're able to really highlight a variety of different scenarios, which maybe takes people many, many years of experience to be able to get. And with our years and years of, I mean, basically hundreds of years of marathon coaching experience, if you want to take the number of athletes that we've coached and how many times they've run, and you're stretching it there with hundreds. But we've had hundreds of people run this race. And then if we consider what Rogue has done over the number of years with the marathon in general, we've been able to play these things out. And so what's the generality, as we talked about in episode five, is getting a lot more specific when we talk about particular races, as we did with Austin and as we are going to with Boston here.

Exactly. So we'll divide this up into sort of pre-race thoughts, and then during the race, how do you break it down? As we go into the pre-race, first thing I wanted to tee up is the late start and how you deal with it. And as we jump in, I'm gonna share a story about my first Boston, because it's relevant as it relates to the late start. But I ran my first Boston in 2006. Interestingly, I qualified for that race in February of 2006 at Austin, and then still was able to sign up and race in April. So it shows you how much things have changed.

10 years.

In 10 years or 11 years.

Now you can't even get your Boston qualifier and you don't even get to go to Boston.

Exactly.

Which by the way, I'm calling bullshit on him because I don't get very many opportunities to do it. Boston, you need to change it. Change that rule. Either make the time faster, but don't steal a BQ from people. All right, I'll get back to it.

The only thing I like about that, Steve, and we can argue about it for just a second, is that the one thing it ensures is that everybody who goes to Boston left it all in the course for their qualifier, right? You can't stand back.

That is very true. And I do think there is a great benefit to that, that people are not just tapping it. But the movable, I just think that there's something more magic about this race. And I would not want us to change our Olympic trials qualifying standard to some other model other than one, two, or three. I just think the idea of making a changeable ongoing shifting sort of target for The Boston Marathon makes it a real challenge and a real sadness, because you don't really know where you're at. And it's just to me, if the reason that that's happening is, my guess is the reason why this is happening is because they've got celebrity runners, they've got people running for charities, but those are wonderful things. But just set those up after you've hit the time. And if it's a budget situation, charge those folks a little bit more money to do the things that they're doing. I think that we're losing a little bit of the magic of Boston. If they want to shift the times to being faster, do it. But at least set the time and put it in lights and put it in stone and let people go chase it.

Fair, fair counterpoint. All right, so the late start. So my first Boston, 2006. At that time, the race started at noon because that was the original start time in it. And it ran that way all the way until the late 2000s when they moved it up to 10 a.m. for the main field and 9.32, I think it is, for the women's elite field. And so with the noon start, I ate an early breakfast, got on the bus, went to Hopkinson, sat in the field with everybody else, walked a mile to the start, and I hadn't eaten anything between my early breakfast and my noon start. So by the time 2.30 rolled around and I was approaching mile 20, the wheels came off. And that was the first race where I've just truly bonked. Everything got fuzzy. I didn't know what was going on in my head. I ended up slipping, letting my goal of running sub-three there that year slip away by under 30 seconds. And so, but it was a tough final six miles because I had literally no gas left in the tank, simply because I hadn't managed that late start well enough. Incidentally, at the end, that was Easter weekend, that year, they were handing out Peeps to the sugar bunnies at the finish, and I put about six of those back right away, and the lights came right back on.

Maybe that says something, we should start having some Peeps as well.

I haven't had a Peep since. But it does beg the question, even with the 10 a.m. start, how do you deal with the late start?

Number one, you wake up at the time, if you're a morning trainer and you train in the morning, you wake up at the time that you normally wake up, assuming for the hour, for us in Central Time, assuming for the hour that you have for the time change. But you eat, and you don't need to eat a huge meal, but you need to eat. The good news is that you don't, as opposed to what you probably needed to do with the noon start, you don't need to necessarily have any major meal or have any real, you can do little top-offs if you feel comfortable doing that. But I think you're safe to get about a 6 a.m. belly fill and maybe do a teeny bit of snacking when you're on the bus and before the race. But I think that the difference in two hours makes an appreciable difference in terms of what you need nutritionally to do in the morning. Once again, this is why it's so important before your long runs that you're gonna be doing over the next couple of weeks. You don't have many more to do, but if you are doing them, to be sure that you are prepping your food appropriately and determining what you can eat and what you can't eat. There's some strategies about how to do that. We're not gonna go into those right now, but basically, really, you need to determine how much belly full, how far belly full you can go before the race, because you really don't wanna be gelling from 8 a.m. until all the way until the finish line. I think that's pretty dangerous. So that's one thing.

And this is something I think people can practice, and I don't think you have to practice it in the context of a long run necessarily. I think if you can, that's great, but sometimes with weekends, that's hard to do. But really what you wanna do is just understand how your body works nutritionally when you start at that time. And so if you're able to do a training run or a workout at the equivalent time in your time zone a couple of times before Boston, that's gonna be helpful. So you can practice a little bit how big your breakfast is and what kind of snacking or not you might need to do in between.

Yeah, you can even do it on a Sunday for those of you who work a standard work week and get up and get a little something to eat and then get out on a run in central time, get out on a run at nine. Like you said, Chris, you don't have to run a long run, but you do need to get some miles in so you know what's going on.

Because my strategy on the bus, as I've learned it personally, having done three Bostons, is eat a decent sized breakfast sort of normally like I would, and then get on the bus with some snacks. I do dry cereal because it's easy. And I'll basically just graze from the time I get on the bus until the time I'm ready to head to Hopkinson. And not eating a lot, but just a little bit kind of every now and then for the entire time that I'm waiting. Gives me something to do, and it also kind of keeps that stomach from getting empty. The other thing I'll do is bring some scratch or some sort of hydration product with electrolytes, one half a liter or a little bit more or so on the bus with me as well. So I can just take little sips of that to stay hydrated as I'm waiting as well.

Yeah, one note on that, Chris. Really important that we reiterate and highlight something that you said there. If you're going to drink on the bus, I don't mean alcohol, right? But if you're going to drink on the bus, do not drink just water. I think that I don't know how many times the nerves and the dry mouth and the cotton mouth, and you're not used to being waiting. Most marathoners at the level that we're talking about, they are not acclimated to waiting so long during a day for a race, since we race in the mornings all the time. You will guaranteed ruin your race if you're drinking a full liter of water or two liters of water before the race. Without electrolytes, you're going to completely flush your system. I guarantee you're going to have a terrible day. And it's sort of counterintuitive when you think about it. I don't, you know, I stop my marathoners from drinking sort of that super hydration model we talked about in a couple episodes back. I had them stop that at noon or two o'clock on the day before the race. I would still do that in a Boston scenario just to help with the nerves and things, but I think it's really crucial that when they're drinking on the bus, that they drink an electrolyte that they are comfortable with and that they know. Scratch is fantastic because it's not so sweet. It doesn't have that same sweetness that many of the others do.

Yes, because if you're just drinking water and it flushes right through you, your cells aren't actually taking in to use it. So those are our general tips on eating. Eat a decent or normal size breakfast, and then bring some light snacks that are easy on your stomach and a little bit of electrolyte drink with you on the bus to sip as you go. So with that, then we're going to get to this question of managing the logistics of the bus, the Athlete's Village in Hopkinton, and how do you sort of stay sane and also preserve yourself for the actual race itself? What are your tips there?

Well, you know, if you can find us the sliver of shade that is somewhere in that area, find it and hold it with every bit of power you have, because as we found out last year with that incredibly warm morning that we had, especially shocking to me, I think I've said this before, I was standing at the start, right at the finish line in downtown Boston. I walked out the door right at gun time, and I'm like, oh, it's kind of nice out here. It's like 55 degrees, which isn't super optimal, and then I was watching my runners, I was tracking them, and they were blowing up just left and right. And I'm like, I found out later that it was 75 or some odd weather at the start. It was just crazy. But I think the key thing is be prepared with a variety of different clothes. I mean, I think that it's been hot lately, but it could easily be cold. It could easily be windy. Be sure that you've got some extra stuff that you can pack off and get rid of. But make sure you've got some clothes because you're going to be out in the weather for a bit. You don't get to sit on the bus all the way to the start line. You've got some time. You've got to wait. So bring some clothes. These days, find a podcast that you like to listen to or maybe some music or something else to take you into a zone where you don't have to be super conscious, but you can kind of just let the internal monkey mind sort of calm down a little bit by not having to be thinking constantly about the race, a little distraction is very helpful and very useful. Sitting down, I mean, you do have a bit of a track, especially if you're on, you know, in Austin, we're using Duke's buses. Many of other places use different buses. There's other ways of getting there. We're not going to go into that too much. Hopefully, you guys have your plans already set with that. But you know, you do have a bit of a walk, so you want to find a place to sit if you can, get off those feet and let those dogs rest because they're about to go get some pounding in.

Yeah, for that, I generally recommend, if you're going to be in the Athletes Village, to bring a towel, a blanket, something you can discard but that you can sit on or potentially cover up with if it's cold. Bring something to do, as you said. You can listen to music or a podcast. You could also bring the paper. I brought the New York Times from the hotel last year and was reading that.

Yeah, don't read Brothers Karamazov, all right? That's probably not going to work for you, but, you know, read something inspirational.

And the other thing I found helpful, as I've done this a few years, is to meet some people. Say hi to somebody you don't know. Get their story. I met a really interesting guy on the bus last year that sat next to me, and he came to running later in life after his son had died in a horrible car accident. And he needed a way to cope, and so he started running, and then turned that into a Boston Qualifier, and then he'd done Boston several years. And so Boston, for him, sort of represented this celebration of his son who was no longer with him. And I was sitting there sort of feeling insignificant about my story relative to his, but I found every year I've been talking to people either in the village or on the bus. You just meet so many interesting people with so many cool stories. And obviously you don't want to waste energy going to meet people, but just having casual conversations can take your mind off things and also potentially inspire you.

Yeah, it's pretty rare to have a scenario where you have as many like-minded in terms of passion and the fact of being, as marathoners, many folks, they find themselves at parties or at other social occasions where they're sort of an odd duck. This is The Boston Marathon starting line or Athlete's Village is a place where you're going to be around so many folks who have a similar story to yours. There's maybe more dramatic in the case that you just shared with us, Chris, or some of them may be a little bit more banal. But basically, what you're gonna find is some connection. And I think that's really cool. I think that's why 2013's, the bombing that happened then, the resonance that it has throughout the entire world, but especially in the running community, to me, is a testament to the fact that all these folks on this day have chosen to run this race, and they all had to earn it, which is a really cool thing.

And the only asterisk on talking to people is stay away from those crazy people that all they wanna talk about is their plan and their race times.

Oh, yes.

And are just overly nervous and worried.

Which they'll throw away the moment the gun goes off anyway.

So avoid those people. All right, so we've talked about those logistics, bus and athletes village, then there's obviously the long walk to Hopkinton, which you can't avoid unless you're elite and you get dropped off right by the start. So you just, you gotta deal with it. Take your time, know it's coming. You gotta, if you haven't run Boston, you're gonna walk a mile. I think it's slightly more than a mile, maybe less depending on which corral you're in. But you've gotta hike through Hopkinton. Which by the way, for me is just cool because you kinda get to soak in Hopkinton a little bit and you see all those people on the other side of the fences where they're in their front yard. And they understand Boston like no one else because they're right there at the start watching thousands upon thousands of people pass them year after year. So just kinda soak in the scene and you get in the cattle herd with everybody else so you can kinda turn your mind off. But just look around, enjoy it, and don't be annoyed that you're having to burn your legs a little bit as you head to the start.

You know, even those folks who are out there thinking, you know, I kind of look at Boston as two ways. You're either gonna go for it to run your PR to have the best day you can possibly have at Boston and you're teed up and ready to go and you're fit. Or you're waving at the crowds and kissing babies, right? So you don't, either way though, even if those two basic extremes, I still think at this time you really need to do the same. This is what I'm gonna be talking about at the beginning of my race plan, is you need to take it easy and you need to have fun. I mean, that's what this is all about. Soak it in, experience the moment, recognize the amount of commonality that we have as a species, as people. And even though we may have different political views, come from different world views, we are sharing that moment and sharing that experience that goes, in my mind, way beyond what Patriot state is and way more to what it means to be a human who's pushing the edges of what they're capable of. So either way, have fun, enjoy yourself.

Yes, and a couple of other tips I have for the walk is, one, don't stop at the first set of porta potties as you roll, because everybody will have. And for those that might be in the first four corrals of any wave, there's actually some porta potties to the right of the start line that are not allocated for elites that anybody can use that are kind of in a grassy park area that tend to be open, because no one actually looks that far up. And so that's always my secret spot to go grab a last minute bathroom break. And then the other thing I'd say is keep all your clothes on if it's cold until the very last minute, because they're going to have people in the corrals with bags or near the corrals with bags that will be taking that stuff. So you want to keep everything on if it's cold for as long as possible. And if it's not cold and it's sunny, like it was last year and hot, then obviously, you know, throw on your sunscreen and maybe a visor. But definitely just be patient as you approach that starting line.

You know, I do think if there's one piece of equipment that every runner should take to the start line of The Boston Marathon, it's either a visor or a hat. I think that no matter what the conditions are and what the circumstances are, that's always going to be useful. Easily toss off, easy to keep with you like a Linus' blanket if you need a little love. And I just think that's a really easy thing to use. Even if you're not somebody who wears hats, I still think it's crucial. I know that, I don't know how many people told me last year that they just wished if they had had anything, they'd had a hat. And on a windy day, when it's right in your face, you can tip it down. So that's one piece of advice I have for Boston specific.

All right, so now we're in the crowd, we're ready to roll. It's time to talk race plan. And as we get into this, there's really two decision points to make before you decide exactly which plan or how to follow our approach here. The first is, am I racing or not? You just alluded to it. And for any of my athletes that are doing Boston for the first time, I highly encourage them not to race their first Boston. Because you don't know all the logistics, you don't know what you're getting into in terms of the race and the course and all those things. And if you're focused too much on time, then you tend to miss the experience and you might even come away not enjoying Boston because of all of those logistics. So, and that happened to me really in my first one in 2006. Not only did I bonk, but I came away sort of miserable about my experience because I was trying to run a certain time. I didn't hit it and I was frustrated by that. So you got to make that decision. And I think for first timers, I'd highly recommend running that first one just as an experience, soaking it all in. But it's something you got to think about even if you're more experienced. Sometimes you got to decide whether to go for it or not there.

Yeah, you know, I think that that's really, in my opinion, while even if you're playing, even if you're, I'm going to contradict you, not really contradict you, but just stretch it a little bit and say, although I do think that everyone who's running their first marathon should be extremely flexible about how they approach it and be willing at any point in time to sort of say, like we'd said before, though, last week we said no plan B. Maybe not, but there is a cut bait, and at some point you might want to do that. But I do think one of the great things about Boston is getting a little test run of it. It's a huge benefit to do that. So I would encourage anybody who's going to, who has the goals of getting back to Boston and doing it more times is to take that first time and at least get through the first 10 or 12 miles as if you were going to run the race, pretty seriously, because both the race plan that we're going to line out, both you and I, Chris, we're going to have a little bit of a different race plans, but they both are easily, they're set up easily for you to do that for the first bit. And then you can go back to chilling out and relaxing and enjoying yourself. But again, as you did say, Chris, you need to have your mind made up about what you're planning to do for the full 26.2 mile distance. At least that, and I do suggest if you hope to get back out there and you hope to get another chance at it, be sure you're at least paying attention. Be sure you're at least experiencing some of those undulations that happen in that first half mile that you're not just so, Cheshire Cat grin that you don't recognize how big a drop that first half mile is. And just use that. You're definitely later gonna get all the feel that you need to get of heartbreak and the four hills that are going on through Newton. But early on, I think it's really important also to try to give yourself a chance to get a feel for a little dress rehearsal, especially if you're planning on coming back.

So that's one question. Do I race it or do I just enjoy the ride and soak it in a little bit? Now, as we go into the first opening miles, there's another question, which is how aggressive should I be or should you be at the start in the first four miles? And those first four miles, the course drops about 300 feet. And as you said, that first half mile particularly is steep. And I'm always surprised when I run it, how steep it is. I forget every year. It's steep so that you can't just kind of relax and roll. You definitely feel your braking happening no matter what, even if you're really good at downhills. So you have to make a decision though, with those downhills and with all the chaos of the start, because that's one thing about Boston, no matter how fast you are, there's gonna be a lot of people around you that are also fast. And so I've been as high as the first corral and spent time in second and third corrals, and you still are surrounded by people and it's jam. So depending on how someone deals with all that chaos, you may have a little bit of different plan. But you and I kind of diverge in terms of how to approach the first four miles. After that, we're pretty consistent and similar. But the decision for the first four is, do I start a little bit slower than marathon pace and kind of work down to it? By my recommendation, that'd be about 30 seconds a mile. Or do I get right out like you would recommend and start right on marathon pace or marathon effort? So give us your two cents on that decision.

So ultimately, my suggestion here is gonna primarily be, that my basic overall suggestion is to approach The Boston Marathon as a controlled marathon pace effort. Many people will hear me say a negative split effort, not a negative split race, but a negative split effort, which basically means a pretty relatively even split plan from start to finish. We'll get into a lot more of those details a little bit later, about the late miles. But early on, from that perspective, I think that, in my experience over the years, having coached many Boston Marathoners, asking them to go 30 seconds per mile slower in the opening miles, is just almost, it's nigh on impossible. And so many people have such a hard time. And if you're gonna do Chris' plan, you damn straight better get to the back of your corral, as you're probably gonna say later, Chris. You just have got to get to the back of your corral. Because if you are anywhere in the front half of your corral, you are going to be, it is gonna be a very hard time in those first four miles not going too fast. So my suggestion is in those first four miles, run MGP, run your marathon goal pace. What do you wanna run? What's your time? Run that pace. That's probably the only place in this entire race that I'm gonna be asking you to really pay attention to your specific pace per mile. Because in that first four miles, if you're running at your MGP marathon goal pace, at that point, let's say that your marathon goal pace is seven minute per mile pace, it's likely to be 15 seconds in the first mile, it's maybe even 30 seconds easier. And it rolls, it definitely drops and pops and drops and pops. But you're going to be given some gifts from that downhill. And it seems to me, as long as you're very strict early on about locking into as close to the marathon goal time, goal pace that you can, you're going to put yourself in a really good spot later on. Now, this won't work if you are, if you are not fit enough to run the time that you want to run. If you want to run, say three hours, and you are not, and you are running, if you think you're fit enough for three hours, but you're not sure and you maybe think it really is 3.05, you need to stick to Chris' plan and go 30 seconds per mile back, I think. I'm in a complete agreement with Chris about that. My plan really works for those folks who are really specifically prepared for this race, ready to run downhills, are within a minute or so of what they think that their time goal is gonna be, and they are confident that they can get it, but they know it's a bit of a stretch. If you're way fitter, go out slower. If you're not fit at all, go out slower. But in my plan, and I actually stretch this entire plan of sort of running at your marathon goal effort, at least the first four miles at a specific pace, and then from four to 10 miles at your MGP effort so that you can ebb and flow. It'll see some five-second bumps, five seconds faster, five seconds slower. If you're more than five seconds, it's pretty dangerous. But again, at that point, you shouldn't be paying too much attention to your watch, just except to make sure you're not going too quick. So yeah, I think we diverge in that space. It sounds like for you, you're getting around the fourth mile, you're gonna get pretty close to MGP. Is that right, Chris?

Yes, yeah. And just to finish off this first bit, for me personally, because I've done it both ways, I get so frustrated by the crowds and the people weaving and bobbing that I'd prefer to start slower, as if for me, it'd be like I was going out to do a long run almost, and just let the downhill, so start sort of a minute slower effort, but have the downhill carry me to 30 seconds slower when it comes to actual pace. Then I can just let all the crazy people pass me, start at the back of the crowd, I can really just mellow out and try to enjoy it. The time I did this, when I was trying to be on a certain pace from the gun, I got so frustrated by the chaos of people weaving in and out and clipping me, and trying to pinch me in and next to the curb and so forth, that I lost all this energy just being frustrated. So for me, that's the decision point. I think it comes down to, as you say, experience, fitness levels, and a personal decision about whether or not those crowds are gonna frustrate you. But from there...

One question about that first four miles, Chris. I have not been blessed with the opportunity to run Boston yet. So in those first four miles, is there a better place on the road to be? Is it better to be on the crest of the road? Is it better to be to the left or to the right? Is there any insight you can give in your experience of having run nd where you might position yourself in the road?

The best spot I've found is to be as close to the middle as possible. Because there tends to be more chaos on the edges as people are trying to go around each other. Some people will jump off on the side of the road and run to get around people. And then of course, once you get to the water stations, which are really long in Boston and they're on both sides of the road, people are kind of going both directions towards those and then coming back. So obviously you don't want to be a slave to the middle of the road and fight for that position, but being in the middle seems to avoid the chaos. And so if I'm kind of following this slower start plan in the first four miles, I'll kind of put myself in the middle of the crowd at a slower pace and just let people pass me around the edges.

Yeah, that's the experiences I've heard from other runners as well, that when they got near the crest of the road, they were in a much better spot. Yeah.

But you asked me about, from four on, I'm with you. Four to 10 for sure. You want to find your marathon pace and then hit it as close to possible as you go through the rollers. Because you do ebb and flow with elevation from five to 10, but no major climbs. And you can pretty much dial in within five seconds to your pace and just try to make that as easy as possible.

So what's happening, y'all, in case you don't, if you haven't run Boston, stop the podcast right now, get on the BAA site, or at least do a Google search for Boston Marathon Elevation Chart. And look at it. I mean, it can't be denied. The kind of descent and the kind of pounding that's gonna be going on, unless you've run a St. George or a Mountain to Beach or some other downhill race that is specific, that you've worked on this specific marathon downhilling, there's not another race quite like it. Even CIM, while it has these rollers and it sort of goes down, it doesn't go down with the same kind of aggressiveness and then it doesn't have later the hills in the middle of the race. So what we're trying to get you to do is to not pound those legs into the dust. And if you're going to do something on these, there's one thing I think that's really important and I highly recommend doing some downhill running at or around the paces that you wanna run and to try to pick some varying terrain where you roll a little bit and run at your MGP. You can be fresh or you can be tired. You can do it in a workout. We'd like to do it in a workout. Well, we do it in Austin year round constantly. But work on some descending to try to figure out where the pitch of your body position needs to be in order to maintain the pace that you wanna maintain. That is the crucial piece. It's getting those hips in the right spot, getting your shoulders and your hips underneath you, your shoulders in the right position so you can take a little bit of advantage of that hill, but you're not putting that heel out and pounding the ground and getting that eccentric loading bang that happens in those early miles. Even if you do have prepared optimally for downhill running or varied terrain running in terms of ups and downs, I still think getting that body position and trying to run in such a way that you don't pound is one of the crucial and key things that you need to be doing.

You gotta have some leg strength left.

Yes, you're going to.

For the finish. So for me, as I've looked at the course and run it, even going from 10 then to 15, it's pretty consistent as well. So kind of my plan would say go from five to 15 at close to marathon pace and try to find that rhythm all the way through 15. I know you break it down a little bit further, so give me those further sections after 10.

All right, so Natick, going from Natick basically to Wellesley Square, you've got basically just a 40 foot drop in that 3.1 miles, in that 5K. And I just think this is an important place to really pay attention to because here is the spot where those folks who did not take heed to our suggestions and were called like the sirens to the cliffs of this race course will begin to start to come back to you a little bit. And so one thing I think it's really important to do is to get to the center of the road again after you hit your water stops. Get back to the center of the road, stay alert and hold your position. The vast majority, most of this race plan, in fact, almost this entire race plan is based on a plan that was devised and utilized to great success over and over and over for many years by the coach, great coach, one of the best coaches, marathon coaches in the world, Bill Squires. He's known best for being the coach of Boston Billy, Bill Rogers. He was the coach of the Greater Boston Track Club. Anybody that knows their history of the Boston has seen that picture, that wonderfully iconic picture of Bill Rogers in his Greater Boston Track Club, white cotton tee that he used a sharpie to write the letters of his club on. And Bill Squires was an amazing character. He was rambunctious, had an incredibly dry attitude and dry wit. And he coached some amazing performers who ran incredibly well at Boston. In fact, many of these folks were locals. Bill Rogers was a local. Randy Thomas, who was top 10 a couple of times. Greg Myers, who won one year. Jacqueline Gereau, a 1980 women's champion. He was instrumental in coaching these athletes to successful races at Boston, and he had them run mile after mile after mile on this route, section after section. This is back in the 60s, 70s, and 80s when this was possible to be able to get out on the route and run it. And of course, they lived in that neck of the woods. So you're getting a prion from my perspective that's coming from one of the greats. In fact, one of the great stories is Dick Beardley who was not living in Boston. I think he might have spent some time in Boston, but he was not necessarily directly attached to the Greater Boston Track Club, but he was definitely coached by Bill Squires in the year that he and Alberto Zalasar went toe to toe and punch for punch in that amazingly great race that's the Duel in the Sun as it's famously called. This is the race plan. This is the way that he described it for him to be running. So, you know, Bill Squires, those of you who know, some of your histories know that the old Elliott Lounge, this guy would sit down the bar and scratch out to any on all comers workouts on paper napkins. I tell you, that's a guy cut after, I'm cut from that cloth for sure. So this plan that we're discussing, that I'm discussing is really based on a really historical and very highly used and very successful plan. And I think it's just as applicable for the everyday runner who's prepared and ready for Boston as it is for the elites, Chris.

I agree. So when it comes to that Nattick to Wellesley Square section, and you said, as you mentioned, you've got a little bit of downhill in there. The main thing is-

MGP. Staying at the same pace.

You need to be a little bit careful on that downhill.

Correct.

So we're in alignment there. Where do you go from Wellesley Square? Because basically from here to the finish, you and I are in lockstep on the plan.

Absolutely. This section here, Wellesley Square, basically to Newton's Lower Falls, that's like 13.1 to 16. And it's drops, much of this elevation drop that I'm gonna give you happens in that first, right around that 16-mile mark. But they're getting 137 feet of elevation down to 49 feet of elevation. So this is a huge, precipitous, three-quarters of a mile long hill. And I cannot tell you how important at this point it is to not run any faster than your marathon goal pace on that section. Again, this requires you to have done some downhill running and to get your body positioning just right. But you want to stay on pace. You cannot overrun this hill. You do not want to be leaning into it, letting yourself fly, pounding down it. You also don't want to be thinking about yourself as, oh, I've got to slow way, way, way down. You need to have basically got your body positioning right so that you can run with the least amount of effort and try to stay as close to your marathon goal pace as you can there. And at this point as well, if you've got bodies coming by you and you've followed this plan to this point, be very cautious about yielding too much ground to any massive number of people that are running by you because at this point in time, you should be catching people, maybe not on this three quarter of a mile section, but definitely in this three mile section getting to the 16th mile. You should be passing folks. If you're passing folks and they're coming back to you and you're on pace, awesome, great job. You're ready for what's coming next. If you've got bodies coming by you in a bit of a stream, wake up and get back, get your head in the right spot. Now, again, don't do that on that three quarters of a mile downhill. There's sort of the drop off there that drops off the lower falls section. But be careful if you're grueling too much ground to runners around you.

It's a crazy downhill, and I think it's not just something that might cause you to go a little bit fast pace-wise. But I remember when I bonked in 2006, I remember that this mile was my fastest mile of the race. Not just because of the downhill, but because there's some sort of adrenaline that comes with it, which is that you sort of realize you're 15 miles into The Boston Marathon. You catch the magic of that a little bit. And you combine that with the downhill, and suddenly you feel, because it's pretty early in the race still, you suddenly feel invincible. And I remember feeling that way as I flew down this thing in 2006, only to find myself trying to figure out what was going on in my brain about five miles later. So it's not just the downhill, but it's also kind of the placement and the energy.

Yeah, by that time the course has spread out a bit, so you will, even in those folks who are in that sort of three hour all the way to 3.30, which is a pretty massive, compared to any other marathon that you run, those folks in those zones are usually not, don't have a ton of people to run with. I mean, you were in the 2.45 range when you were pacing some of our athletes at Chicago, and you didn't have very many bodies around you. And even up to about the three hours and the 3.20, they were starting to get a few more people, but it took to the 3.30 and beyond where we started to see more massives. That massive conglomeration of folks, that this race will still be, you'll have separated a little bit, and you'll have some room to run, and it's really easy at this point to get called to run faster than you should. And I think of all the parts of the course, this is the most important two to three mile section to get it right.

Be patient. And to summarize to this point, we made it to 16 miles. The race hasn't really started yet, and rarely does the elite race ever start before 16, unless someone goes off the front early. But basically, what we're saying is you should run MGP effort from one to 16.

In your case, you're two minutes behind, right? Somewhere in that ballpark range, about two minutes behind. In my scenario, you should be going through the halfway mark, pretty close to what you're hoping you're gonna run, and then you're still holding and sustaining it through to the 16th mile. Yeah, it's a pretty simple plan.

Pretty simple plan.

Not easy, but simple.

Yeah, right. So, with the exception of that decision point early about how it has to start, it's pretty simple. MGP marathon goal pace through 16, and then at 16, it starts to get interesting. We enter the Newton Hills, we got four climbs all the way to Heartbreak. Where do we go from here?

You know, this is where Bill Squires, he called this, he's got a famous name for this. He calls it the killer chain, because it's a chain of basically stepping hills that culminates in Heartbreak. And the elevation drop, you go from basically 49 feet up to 236 feet, and this is from, in my scenario, we're talking Newton, lower falls to Cleveland Circle. So this is 16 to 22. So you're basically gonna climb from 50 feet up to 200, almost 250 feet, and then drop from 250 feet back down to 150 feet. So the suggestion that we have here is relax on the ups, relax on the uphill, run the flats and the downs hard. What is hard? At this point, you should not be referencing your watch. It is what it is. You probably want to get yourself to know where you wanna be at the 22 mile mark. You probably wanna write in Sharpie on your arm or have it available to yourself in a pretty big bold way to know at 22 miles where you wanna be. So if you're able to execute what we're hoping you'll be able to do over the last portion of this race, you'll have a point that you know, and you can do just a teeny bit of math necessary to figure out how much faster you have to go. But you should be running really relaxed on your uphills and not pushing the uphills. Instead, run the flat sections and the down parts harder. At this point, you can let yourself go on the downhills. You've already, if you've been conservative and you've got your legs underneath you, you're able to be a little more aggressive on those downhills and take advantage of them. And just be sure that you're taking it relaxed and easy. So that you can take advantage of this killer chain. Guaranteed, there's gonna be bodies flying back to you. If you've gotten anywhere close to what our race plan is, you are going to have tens, if not hundreds, of people flying by you. You'll be flying by in this section.

What you said, though, about the uphills is really important. For me, as I talk about the Austin plan on exposition, I tell people, don't fight the uphills. Let them win. Let them naturally slow you down. The same thing is true here. As you say, push the downhills a little bit, but just don't fight. Relax on the uphills. Let people pass you there, because you will either catch them on the downhill or you'll catch them in the finish, close to the finish. And pace-wise, though, if you're doing your job and relaxing on those downhills, you might be running a little bit slower than pace on average. So I think anywhere from 10 to 20 seconds slower if you're doing your job and really relaxing on those uphills than your goal pace. But that's okay. Let it happen. It's the Newton Hills, even the elite struggle here. This is where things blow up in the elite field. And so you gotta also respect these hills. It's interesting, going to the last one, heartbreak. I remember the first time I ran heartbreak, even though I was partially depleted and starting to get a little bit wonky as the bonk came on for me. I remember being underwhelmed by heartbreak hill, like thinking, well, this isn't that big of a deal. And it really isn't if you take it by itself. If you actually look at the elevation change on heartbreak, it's you gain about 80 feet in the mile that is in at his heartbreak hill around mile 21 of The Boston Marathon. And that's very similar to the elevation gain if you're going up Congress per mile in the Austin Marathon. No one ever really worries about the Congress Avenue Hill in the Austin Marathon because it's in the first three miles.

Yeah, it's not at mile 21.

But the fact that heartbreak is at mile 21, which already has some tough connotations in a marathon, but also at the end of this four-hill chain that you just talked about, is the reason why it's called Heartbreak Hill. It's the placement of it versus the raw elevation change related to it.

You know, I think in my experience in talking to athletes who have run this race, I think really if you've got yourself girded and ready going into that 16th mile, and when you take that right-hand turn after you come off of the firehouse, that's really the real important spot to be vigilant and be ready. You know, you need to relax there, but every time from that point on that you get a flat or a downhill, you ought to be working. And I think that if you're able to stay relaxed in the first 16 miles, you're going to be able to execute that plan. If you're fit enough to be running at the paces that you've set for yourself in terms of your marathon goal pace, you're going to be just fine. You know, we talk about this all the time, Chris, the number of variables that go into proper execution of a marathon race plan, the number of variables that can make anything go wrong are limitless. So while we're not telling you this is a foolproof way to get what you want, we do have years and years and many, many, many, many marathoners who have done this and had great experiences this way. So take it from us, as in Chris' case, someone who's done it a couple of times, in my case having coached hundreds of people to executing a great race plan on this course. This method works.

So marathon pace through 16, then control yourself on the uphills, give a little bit of time back through Newton, and if you've done your job, you'll get to mile 22 and you'll be ready to finish this thing out. You've got a net elevation drop in the final five miles of this race. So, but you aptly note that you kind of have to break it in a couple different sections because of the way it plays out.

Yeah, you know, I think it's really important to kind of look at this thing as 22 miles to 25 miles and then from 25 miles to the finish line. And so Cleveland Circle is really where you're really coming off of the hills and you're about to do basically an elevation drop from about 147 feet down to 20 feet. So you're still getting a good bit of drop there. It's a gentle downhill. And at this point in time, I don't know how many times I've heard people who have followed a close plan, either a negative split plan that they were able to be effective with or this sort of negative, this sort of marathon pace effort plan that we're describing right now. I can just, the sheer elation and jubilation and excitement that prepared athletes have through this section, I have seen athletes run somewhere in the vicinity of two minutes over the course of this, from this, in this section, dropping two minutes. Amy Anderson, who I coached for a number of years and who was a coach for us here at Rogue, I will never forget helping pace her through this section. I was literally pushing bodies away, leading in front of her in a pole position. Ruth was sort of running to her side, and I was just, at first I was trying to run beside her, and I realized I couldn't. We just had a phalanx set in position to try to run her through the bodies, because it is just shrapnel out there. But you really do need to keep concentrated and keep focused through here. You're not done. And almost everybody that's run marathons knows this, but the famous sicko sign that comes up with a mile to go is a real heartbreaker, because it hurts a whole lot. And so if you're able to maintain your speed and keep focused and not be too aggressive, one of the things we've suggested in our other marathon plans is to never go faster than five seconds per mile, faster each mile. I think in this race plan, on this course, if you've got it, you can do that. At 22 miles, you can take that risk. You just have to realize that you might give up a little bit in that last section, that Kenmore Square or right around where the sicko sign is going into the finish line. There's a little bit of tacking ups. Of course, there's a little bit of uphill that you have on the very last stretch going into the finish line. But here, hopefully, you will know what you're going to have. Everybody that gets to 22, there are no surprises at this point. Everything is well known. And what you're trying to do here is execute and keep on your feet, keep turning over, keep focused, and use that gentle downhill to the best of your ability.

And I like to say, as a coach to my marathoners late in the race, go fishing. As you say, if you've done this right, you're going to be catching people. And if you're not passing people, that means you're slowing down. So pick out shirts and singlets ahead of you and go after them, because most people will be coming back to you at this point.

So give them a little bit more of an idea of what you mean by go fishing. What do they need to do? Give us a logical way of looking at this or a practical way.

When I'm in this mode, I look ahead maybe 40 to 50 meters ahead. So not right in front of you, but enough to give you something to reach for. And pick out a shirt that's bright or singlet that's bright, that stands out. Sometimes the person that's in that singlet might have to do with who I pick out. You know, as a guy, we often chase women. So there's maybe some of that going into the thing. You pick somebody out that can be a good carrot to go after them, and then you focus on pushing until you find yourself passing that person. And then you do the same thing again. You pick another shirt to go after, singlet to go after, and chase them down. Because if you're doing that, it gives you something to focus on to distract yourself from the pain, but it also gives you little wins that you can start to rack up that give you momentum as you head towards that finish line.

Yeah, when I coach collegially, I used to say up and around, which is the same basic idea. And I would usually, especially in cross country, I would say go get pink, which would mean pink shirt. Go get red. And if we were running at our conference championship, I could always say go get Oklahoma. Or go get Oklahoma State, or whoever it was. Occasionally I would say go get ugly orange, because Oklahoma State was always ugly orange. But up and around, or go fishing, is the quintessential, this is the greatest race to do that with. Because while many of your compatriots and folks that you earned the right to get to this race course, you will be passing people that you probably won't ever get a chance to pass in other races again. If you run in Chicago, you're probably passing people who are probably five minutes, ten minutes for a marathon time faster than you. But at Boston, the great equalizer, you're able to go bring them in.

The other thing I would say, as you close this one out, and again, I think if you've done it right, you can probably run 15 to 20 seconds faster per mile, maybe even more, than your target pace if you get yourself to 22 in a position to close it out. But once you get into that last mile past the sit-go sign, you've got to be ready mentally for that because it's going to be four, five, six deep crowds, and the energy's going to be there. But two things. One, you've got to be a little bit careful not to let it all out too soon, as you've referred to before with some of your athletes. But then secondly, you've got to realize that that stretch down Boylston at the end, it's not short. And I can remember...

And it's not flat.

It's not exactly flat. And I can remember watching the three-hour mark tick past as I was running down Boylston in 2006. And then I remember it last year when I had to walk that distance after I had gotten a stress fracture in my heel. It's about a half mile once you get on the Boylston from there, from that corner to the finish line. That's a significant amount of time. It could be two and a half to four minutes, five minutes, depending on how fast you are. And you've got to be able to focus. And so I would just think about your strategy for that and what might be best for you. For some people, it might be just to fixate on that finish line. For me personally, the finish line at that point is still too far away to be focused on it, so I try to look around and soak in the crowds to build energy from that before I might focus on the finish line in that last two to four hundred meters. But it's a long stretch, and just be prepared that it's going to feel like it's taken a little bit of time to run that stretch on Boylston.

Two notes here. You know, number one, I don't remember what year it was that Desi got second, but I will never forget watching the number of lead changes and back and forths. It seemed like that section was a mile long because they went at each other and back and forth and back and forth in the year that Meb won in 2013. I think I might have shared this on the podcast before. If I have, I apologize, but I love this story of Meb getting so close to the finish line knowing that he had that Canyon guy running him down and he was sick. He started to get nauseous and was about to puke, and he knew that if he vomited to the side that this guy was going to have all the energy he needed. It was long enough stretch for him to be able to know that he could get caught, so he puked in his own mouth, in his own hand, and then threw it to the ground. To me, it's like one of the great stories of American distance running and the history of American distance running, but there's enough time for those kinds of things to be happening. And then one other suggestion I have, at this point in time, you don't really need to go fishing. You're too close to the finish for that, but what I do suggest you do is look at the crowd and pick somebody out in the crowd. They'll find you. It's amazing how they're looking for eye contact, the people who go out onto Boylston want to connect with you, the people of Boston, Massachusetts want to connect with you, the people of New England will come in here for this big party to connect with you, and not even the bombs on Boylston in 2013 could stop people from coming out. And use that opportunity to connect with people. I guarantee you, you'll be moved close to tears, if not actually crying down that last section as you realize that people will start calling out your name or calling out your blue shirt or red shirt or whatever it is that you've got, knee socks or whatever you're wearing, people will respond to. And so I suggest maybe every 100 meters or so over that last 800 meter section, pick out six or seven different times to look at the crowd and let that lift you. This is the magic of this race. And it is there, there for you because it's your Olympics, and they know it's your Olympics. They're cognizant of that, they recognize it, and they want to connect with you. And it can be a great boon and a great energy boost.

Soak it all in. You've earned it. Now, in summary, really our plan is pretty simple. As an aside, there are some plans you'll see that go mile by mile and try to adjust for the terrain in each mile. We're saying that's crazy because you can't really focus mile per mile and hit a specific pace. Our plan is pretty simple. One through 16, run marathon goal pace, or if you're following my approach and being a little more conservative in those first four miles, do that, then get on marathon goal pace from five to 16. 16 to 21, Newton Hills, give a little bit of time back. Don't fight the hills, but start to be a little bit aggressive on the downhills. And then 22 to the finish, close it out and go fishing. Pretty simple.

Pretty darn simple. For a race that's known for complexity and difficulty of executing in, the simplest plan is the best. But you guys, this really requires, I want to reiterate this again, at least in my case from the perspective that I'm coming at it from, you will wear yourself out if you're trying to run your specific marathon goal pace on this course. It's not doable. It can't be done. There's too much undulation of pace. It's undulation of hills and elevation. So you need to just stay within that five to seven second window back and forth and back and forth, except for 16 to 20, at least through the first 16 miles, most assuredly. You need to be sure that you don't want to be 10 seconds too fast. If you continue to be 10 seconds too fast, you're not going to make it. You're not going to make it. As I have my rule of threes in Boston, it's even more so. My rule of three is however seconds or minutes you are too fast at the halfway point, you can multiply that by three. So if you're 30 seconds too fast at the halfway point, you're probably going to run at least 90 seconds slower, if not more. If you're a minute too fast at the halfway point, you're probably going to end up three minutes too slow at the end of the race. So keep that in mind. And believe me, there are people, many, many people. In fact, I bet you if you did the same critical analysis that you did for the Austin course, and you tried to figure out exactly how many people, how much there was, I guarantee you that you're seeing 10 plus minute positive splits, in some cases even more. This is the race that more people walk off of. It's probably the DNF champion of the world in terms of people walking off this course. And it's not an easy course to get back home from. So, you know, that's something to keep in mind. But please, enjoy this thing, but don't be too really specific with your Garmin. You know, we've talked before about the importance of effort-based training. It's really important for this race to be an effort-based racer.

All right. There you go. So that's our first episode in this little mini-series on Boston, Episode 14. We've given you a little bit of history. We've given you some way too early race predictions. And now you have your race plan ready to go. We'll come back a week out from the race and tell you some inspirational stories from the history of Boston to get you primed and ready to go for Marathon Monday. Thanks, as always, for listening. You can check us out at roguerunning.com or on Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram at Rogue Running. You can also subscribe and download us on iTunes. So check us out there. As always, thanks for joining, and we'll talk to you soon.

Later, peeps.