Hey, everybody, welcome to episode 362 of the Running Rogue podcast. Happy Holidays, everyone, coming to you from December 26th here in Austin, Texas. Excited to give you my last episode of the year. I will not have an episode being released next week, as I will be traveling with family for the holiday. But then I'll be back with episodes starting the week of January 6th. So happy end of 2024 and happy new year as we step in to 2025. As promised, this episode is going to be a Q&A episode answering your listener questions from really across the country, which is awesome. I'll be getting through these in no particular order based on really when they came into my inbox. So I appreciate all of these questions coming in. We'll get to as many as I can. And before we get there, quickly wanted to just remind you that starting on the week of January 6th, we will be opening the Rogue Renegades podcast based training group, which is the group I coach with James Dodds. So if you're interested in joining that group, we only open it a couple of times a year in January and June. So if you're interested in joining us for season 15, then look for the sign up link to go live on January 6th. You can find out information about that group in advance by going to our website, clicking on the train button. That's roguerunning.com. Click on train, click on virtual group training, and then you'll find all the info about the Renegades if that's of interest to you to be coached by me in that group format. So check that out starting on January 6th. Usually it'll only be open for two or three weeks. So you have to jump on it when you can, and then we'll be closing it again until June. So go check that out if you're interested. And with that, let's jump into our questions. Here we go. This one is from Kim from Canada. How's it going, Kim? Thanks for the question. She says, I've been a marathon runner since 2017. Last September, I ran my first trail race. It was a 48K mountain race, and it took me eight hours and 30 minutes to complete it. Now that we're getting into the cold Canadian winter season here, I was thinking of training for a fast 5K in May. But after that, I was hoping to run my first 50 miler in October. Do you think it makes sense to train for a fast and short race in the spring before hitting the trails during summer in preservation for an ultra in the fall? I'm assuming she meant preparation for an ultra in the fall. I do like to, I would like to have your input. Thanks a lot for your help. So there you go, Kim from Canada. Thanks for the question, Kim. One, I really like where your head's at. I love the fact that you're thinking about the spectrum from 5K all the way to ultra marathon as a marathoner. And I think it's fun to dabble in all of those things. So my short answer for you is absolutely it makes sense, especially if you're excited to do it. You know, when I think when it comes to choosing races, I think there's a variety of things to think about when you're trying to figure out what your annual slate of races might look like. One there's what's optimal for you from a training perspective, making sure that you're doing the things I talk about in terms of balancing the distances from 5k to 10k to marathon and even in your case to ultra marathon marathon. So balancing those distances is important. And if speed is still on your mind at some point, whether that be in the ultra distance or in any distance, then it is important to always come back to short and fast stuff at some point in your training to make sure you don't lose that faster edge. So that's one thing to think about. Another thing to think about is what your goals are. And in this case, it seems like you're somebody who's interested in certainly lengthening the distances of the races you're covering, but reading between the lines, perhaps there's still the aspiration to run fast at other distances. And if that's true, then again, as I just mentioned, it'll be important to make sure you keep that speed training in the equation at some point, ideally at least one season a year, or one block of training a year in order to hold on to that speed. So yeah, if your goals are still to get fast at other distances besides the ultra distance, then I think it's important. I also think as you move to the ultra distances, if you're doing more and more of that, speed training is still critical to, again, make sure you don't lose that faster edge while you're going the long and easier distances. So that's a second thing you want to factor in goals. Third thing you want to factor in is what races you have access to. So looking at your racing schedule and figuring out that there are 5Ks and perhaps 10Ks in the spring season, wherever you are in Canada, is going to be an important part of the equation as well because you want to make sure that you're not going out of your way to find races or doing things that are abnormal or unnatural for you in terms of the races that you're choosing, particularly considering the travel budget that you may have. And most of us, I don't think, want to go long distances to race 5Ks in general. So if you have access to those and there's better ones in a certain season of training, then that would be a time to certainly focus on those distances to make sure you can get that training in when the racing is appropriate for your area. And then the fourth thing to consider in all of this is what are you excited about? And I always want people to make sure that they're doing races and distances that they're excited about. Not to the exclusion of other distances, but certainly you want to make sure you have that fire still lit. If you're excited about something, then go do it. Find a way to work it in, in a balanced way, making sure that that balances with the other distances that we've talked about. It seems like, again, reading between the lines from your email, you're excited about the Spring 5K and you're also excited about the 50-miler in October. So I would say absolutely go do it. It seems to fit into the plan. It gives you plenty of time to transition from that 5K to train for the 50-miler after you race this one. And then you can build and get ready for that first 50-mile distance. One thing I would remind people that just because we're doing speed blocks doesn't mean our long runs shouldn't be robust. And in this case, considering that you're transitioning from 5K training to 50-miler training, I would love for you to stay as connected on the longer distances as possible. Doesn't mean that you necessarily have to go beyond 16 miles in your training, but I think that's probably prudent as a peak for your 5K. But you're still working in those 14 to 16-mile long runs as you prep for the 5K while mixing in the appropriate speed-focused training for the 5K so that when you do switch gears for the 50-miler, you are ready to quickly build up in distance without missing too much of a beat. So that would be my only advice in your 5K cycle is make sure you stay connected on that longer long run. And with that, Kim, thanks for the question, and I wish you luck. Okay, our next question here comes from Peter. Peter didn't tell me his location, but that's okay. He says, I did my first marathon in 1985. I ran a 326 and have been running ever since, mostly for fun rather than racing. I have done a few more marathons since then, but the last was a 336 at the age of 50. Now I'm 60. Want to see what I still have left in me. So I have entered CIM for 2025 with the goal of around 345. I'm base building now about 40 miles per week and managing to stay injury free by limiting this high speed workouts. Thanks to your advice, I'm planning to start a 5K, 10K phase in race, then a half marathon block before starting the marathon cycle in early August. Anyway, my question is nothing to do with this. When I train, I try to keep my heart rate in a zone or below a certain level, e.g. in zone 2 or just below threshold. But then if I take caffeine, my heart rate goes up and I end up having to slow down, which is not ideal. So why do people take caffeinated gels, et cetera, caffeine pros and cons? Can you please give us your words of wisdom? Great question, Peter, and thanks for the e-mail. It's exciting to see that you're continuing in your running journey all these years after you started. I'm always inspired by older athletes who are still out there chasing goals, regardless of their degrees of young, as I like to say it. So Peter, your question is about caffeine, and you make a good point. Caffeine does potentially have side effects to it, which is that it can cause elevated heart rate, it can cause heart palpitations in some people, depending on the levels that you're taking, and depending on your use of caffeine in other areas, as well as your physiology. Now, caffeine is perhaps the most effectively documented legal performance enhancing drug that there is out there. And so a lot of people use it to try to get that jolt of energy that it provides to get that extra edge. And it can really be beneficial in really all race distances from short stort stuff all the way to the marathon. I remember Nick Simmons, 800 meter runner from the US who was a multi-time national champion. He talked about using caffeine in his performances, trying to get the best out of himself in the 800. But trying to find a form factor besides drinking coffee that would be effective. And so he invented a product that he calls Run Gum that is a caffeine-infused gum so that he could chew it before he started his races, not have the other digestive effects of taking something with caffeine in it, but get the form from gum, spit it out, and then have those benefits of caffeine as well as B vitamins and some other things that are in his caffeinated gum, Run Gum, which I believe you can get at places like Target and Walmart and things like that. And then, of course, marathoners use it late in a race, perhaps inside their gels in order to get that boost of energy as the going gets tough in the marathon. In order to finish strongly, I believe cyclists in the tour are known to do these things that they, I believe, call caffeine bombs, where they take caffeine pills and they smash them up into small bits, powder-like, and take that down with liquid as well to get that final jolt of energy as they're pushing towards their final sprints. So caffeine is a legal performance-enhancing drug. Now the challenges with caffeine is that everybody can be affected by it differently, particularly depending on your different uses for it. For example, I don't drink caffeine, at least in large quantities, and I don't use it as a mechanism for waking up or staying awake. I don't like coffee. I don't drink coffee in the morning. I do occasionally have caffeine-oriented products, usually in something like a soda or something like that, which I don't drink a lot of, but I do drink on occasion. And so I have this relationship to caffeine, which is a little bit different than my wife, for example, who drinks a bunch of coffee and always has a coffee to start the day. And she's one who uses it, loves it. It helps her get started, not just from a perspective of waking up, but also just that warm, cozy feeling that is a part of many people's routines to start their day in the right way. And so she is someone who would have a headache, for example, if she didn't have her morning coffee, because she has a physical reliance on it. I don't. But if I do have something with caffeine in it, I have to be careful about the quantities because it will make me feel jittery or anxious or on the edge or I'll feel my heart palpitate if I have it in too high of quantities. For example, there are energy drinks and things like Mountain Dew that are higher in caffeine quantity than a standard soda. And I avoid those altogether because if I drank something like that, then it would just cause me to bounce off the walls and that I wouldn't want. So, I can only manage caffeine in certain quantities, and that has also made me hesitant to play with caffeine in terms of using it in a performance enhancing way with races because of that impact that it has on my physiology because I'm not a frequent user of caffeine. And so, yes, the pro of caffeine is that it is a performance enhancing drug. It gives you that jolt of energy that can help push you through a race of any distance, particularly late in a marathon. But you have to know how it might affect you. You have to test it out just like you would test out any gel or nutrition product. And if it's working for you, great. And if it's not working for you, then you have to adjust accordingly. I suspect in your case, Peter, it's not working for you because it is causing that elevated heart rate. Again, that's not going to happen to everybody, but it might happen to you. And if it is happening to you and that's creating a problem for you in terms of your ability to perform, then you're going to either need to dial back on the caffeine level to see if that helps you achieve the right level of performance without impacting your heart rate or cut it out altogether. And that just may not be a tool that you can use. For me personally, it's a tool that I've experimented with a little bit, but I've never been able to find the right formula to use myself. And so, it's not a tool that I have in my repertoire to go use. But I do know that it does work for a lot of people, hence the reason there are caffeinated gels out there. So avoid it if it's not working for you. Dial it back if you want to experiment further. And for those who are using caffeine or who aren't using caffeine but want to try it, highly recommend it, because again, it is probably the most effectively documented legal performance enhancing drug that resides out there. And free shout out for Nick Simmons. His RunGum is something that I have recommended to some people when they're trying to find a caffeine form factor that will allow them to experiment with it without having to actually take something in to their belly to digest. So there you go. Those are my thoughts on caffeine, Peter. Play with it a little bit, but you may find that it's not the right tool for you in which case there are plenty others that you can use. And all of those go back to just the fundamentals of really good training that I've talked about on so many episodes. So there you go. Thanks, Peter. Good question. Now let's see what we have next. Okay, this question is from Jack from Massachusetts, or at least I think it's Jack, J-A-K. Maybe it's Jack or Jock. His question is really about balancing schedule and training. So here we go. He says, I listened to the last few episodes where you interview people, and I figured I'd give you a little synopsis about my situation to see if you might have some insight. I'm a 35-year-old firefighter paramedic in Massachusetts who has been focusing on trying to run a marathon the last two years. While I've been running consistently because I'm very stubborn, I'm struggling to do it effectively due to my schedule. I have three kids, 19, 13, and five, and I work a strange rotating schedule where I work two 24-hour shifts for two weeks on, and the third week, I work three 24-hour shifts. When on shift, I'm on the busiest truck in the department, and it's fairly common for me to get three to four broken up hours of sleep during that shift. When I'm home, I try to get my runs in while my kids are in school. However, I find myself getting on average five hours of sleep a night because I end up getting up early to run before my shift. It is not uncommon for me to get busy with house projects or other things, then have to go get the kids from school, then not be able to go on my run until after dinner and bedtime for the kids, meaning I'm starting my runs around 9 p.m. just to get up at 4 a.m. and to do my next run before work. So I should to say, I do not think I'm getting enough sleep. I am, however, a masochistic machine, and if my watch coach, I'm using a garment and now I'm using Runa, tells me to do a certain run that day, I will do everything in my power to get that accomplished. I feel like I'm almost incapable of not doing a run if I'm told to do it, so for the past two years, I've been operating at this level where I'm starting to feel like I'm getting slightly burned out, but yet I feel like I need to run almost every day for my mental health. My wife will even notice when I take a few days off and start to get slightly cranky and she'll tell me I should go for a run. Due to a few issues, I've not managed to run the last two marathons I've trained for. I guess I have a goal of 330, but really my goal is to just finish without walking as I've never completed a marathon. I've done a half in 140 without training specifically for it, and that is the only race I've ever done. I love to qualify for Boston and run Boston, given that I've worked the race on the EMS side many times. Anyway, sorry for the long, drawn out text. I was just wanting to introduce myself and structure the email. Let me know if you have any other questions or advice on that, or we could chat on the podcast. So thanks, Jack, for that context. That sounds like a challenging schedule for sure. I know what it's like to operate with three kids in a normalish work environment, but to do it with those types of shifts is quite a lot, and I'm sure that's really, really tough to balance. So what advice do I have for you, Jack? First of all, you have to recognize that your situation is very, very unique, and your situation therefore is going to require a unique training approach, a unique training solution that would likely benefit from having a one-on-one coach who can help you navigate this in a customized way, and also in likely a very dynamic way, that might change from three-week period to three-week period, as you figure out what your recovery can look like, and as things get thrown at you, as you have a difficult shift versus a perhaps a little lighter shift, and all of those things are going to need to be balanced. Because ultimately, you can only train as much as you can recover from that training, and it seems to me that if you're only getting three to four broken hours of sleep on shift, and five hours of sleep off shift, then you are not recovering from your actual work, much less from the work that you might be doing in your run training. And I totally get it, running is the balance that helps it all kind of stay together. But if you want to be rigorous about your training, rigorous about training for a half or a full marathon and get through it, then you're going to need to balance it, and you're going to need to balance it in likely creative ways that extend beyond what you can get from a simple cookie cutter or app based solution. You're going to need to be thinking about this thing in a unique and creative way. So that's going to require working with a coach who can take the principles of training and apply it as much as possible to give you a blueprint to execute in the structure that you have, that will hit the most important elements as possible depending on what you might be training for, what your specific goals might be. If you're training for a marathon, obviously a long run is going to be critical. And the volume around that is going to be probably the second most critical piece of the equation, with the quality part of it being the speed work being the least critical perhaps or at least critical in terms of the trade-offs needed to make in order to recover from the work that you're doing. So just thinking out loud, if I was coaching you, and obviously I'd need a lot more specific details about the days that you're working and how those all fit together in order to really come up with a specific solution. But just as an example, I would consider making sure that the long run is prioritized no matter what week you're doing. And we will probably do longer long runs on your two shift a week weeks. So those would be your up weeks. And then on your three shift a week weeks, those would be your down weeks. So we'd be building your long run on those two shift a week weeks, and then we'd be dropping down on the three shift week weeks. So again, you're building on the two and then dropping on the three. But the long run would be prioritized as the number one thing. So we'd be finding ways to fit that in during those weeks to make sure you're getting in the long run, especially if the marathon were your priority. And then we'd be fitting in other easy running around that to the extent that we can based on your schedule that would prioritize the medium long run next and quality of the other major runs last. And we'd be prioritizing obviously recovery runs after any really hard effort. So particularly after the long run, we'd make sure there was an easy opportunity to have an easy recovery day. And if we weren't doing a true quality workout, but instead just doing an easy run perhaps with strides at the end, then that would allow us to de-prioritize a second recovery week, a recovery run during the week, so that you could put higher priority on perhaps a medium long run. And maybe ultimately, you know, the focus is getting you four consistent days of running in that fit the schedule most aptly. And we have perhaps some optional runs or some flexible runs that would be of shorter distance that you could fill in around that if you have the time and capacity. But we would want to make sure that those core runs were most important, that sleep came after that, and that you be able to balance the overall stress of your schedule with the kids and with your job would be of highest priority, because if you're not recovering from the work, then you're not going to be able to build to the race, and you're also going to be potentially compromising your long-term health in the process. Because as we know, sleep is our number one recovery tool. You need to be getting more of it, regardless of how much you run, you need to be getting more of it. And I wouldn't necessarily aspire to eight hours a week or eight hours a night right away, because that's probably too ambitious for you. But I would aspire to getting six, seven hours of sleep, perhaps on those non-shift days as a starting place, because that's going to allow you to unlock, again, not only overall greater health, but also overall physical health that you can then spend, you can put towards the energy of training for a race, such as a half marathon PR or perhaps that first marathon. So, without more specifics, Jack, I won't be able to answer your question beyond that, but I do want to ensure that you know this will be a prioritization exercise to make sure you're doing the most important things, to balance with your schedule so that you can actually recover and make it an additive process to go after whatever your goals may be, and that likely you're going to need somebody that come alongside you to help you figure it out. Maybe you won't need that forever, but having a high-caliber, high-quality coach to help you navigate at least a routine and schedule that fits around yours, I think will be important. And if you're interested in that, then I can always schedule one-off sessions for coaching consults. And of course, we do offer one-to-one coaching, if that's of interest as well. But just follow up on that email, chris.reogrunning, and we'll chat about it. But I appreciate the question, Jack, and thanks for everything that you do for the people of Massachusetts. All right, with that, we'll turn to another question from listener Dan. Dan says, I took up running in 2020 at the start of the pandemic and caught the bug. I completed my first marathon later that year in October, the virtual London Marathon. I then went on to complete the in-person event in October 2021, running a 252, which at the time was incredible for me. Myself and some friends entered Boston, and I set the lofty goal of sub 240. I've listened to pretty much all of your podcasts and formulated my whole training program based purely on this. I also then listened to the episode on the Boston Marathon course and how to set out a race plan. Long story short, I had a great race and ran a 238. Being from the UK, I don't think I realized how special the race is, and it's something I will never forget. Without your guidance through the podcast, I simply would not have run that time. I have since lowered my PR again, running 234 in London this year, but struggled with injuries since, most recently just returning to running after a bony stress response in October. My ultimate goal is to break 230 for the marathon, but I feel like I've gone backwards significantly since my injury. I have London and Chicago in the calendar for next year, but not sure if I should shelve these completely. Would love to know your thoughts on how to go after 229, or even if it's realistic. Dan from the UK, thanks for the question. Looks like this was actually a truly international Q&A. So great question. First of all, Dan, impressive, amazing results to have just started running in 2020 and already be at 234, just foreign change years later is quite unbelievable. Results not typical, but I do love the fact that you've been using these principles and keeping them at the heart of your training in order to get these results, because it does work, regardless of your degree of fast, it does work. I also love the fact that you're still dreaming big. And who am I to say that you're not going to be able to get that 230. I think if you can run a 234, given your trajectory, then likely a sub 230 is very much in the cards. But I do think you need to be smart about it and continue to incorporate the things I've been talking to, talking about holistically. But let me back up from that for just a second and say this. You are in a situation, Dan, where the aerobic system is likely outpacing the neuromuscular and the musculoskeletal system. This is a fairly common thing for to happen to people, which is that the aerobic system outpaces and its development can often, especially when we get three or four years into our running journeys, can often outpace the musculoskeletal system and what it is geared up to withstand in terms of the loads and the pressures that you're putting on it. And there may be other things involved. Again, I don't have a full picture here. But one of the things that I commonly see is that people can plateau around their neuromuscular and their musculoskeletal limits when that aerobic system gets advanced or a little bit too advanced for the body that you may have. And then, of course, you start to find cracks in the foundation, and you start to have injuries pop up and things like that. It sounds like you may be in that situation, where you've had this massive progression from a 252 down to a 234, and the system is just trying to catch up. And you're finding in this space the limits of that musculoskeletal system. And so, here is the bony stress response that you talked about. And yes, the aerobic system likely has more development to do, but we have to catch up the musculoskeletal system in the process. And that's likely what you're facing now as you go through this injury recovery. And you will feel, you will definitely feel, like you're far, far, far out of shape from where you've been, especially if you take the time off that is required when you have some sort of bone stress situation happening. If you truly take the time off, then you're going to feel like you're at zero again. Even though all that fitness is there, it's just a little bit buried. And yes, it'll take time to dig it back up. And yes, it'll be painful when you do. And it might take four to six to sometimes eight weeks to see the light at the end of the tunnel and the training responses. Again, when you rebuild, you will get back to where you were. But it is so important to not rush it in the process. I don't know your age, Dan, but I would remind you that you are still young as a runner. You've only been doing this for four years. As I've talked about before, we can build our aerobic system. We can continue to build our aerobic system, and therefore get faster for 10, 15, sometimes more years if we're consistent about it. And you've had this meteoric rise, and you still have more aerobic development to do. But we've got to catch up the musculoskeletal system, and this opportunity, this injury, is a chance to do that. So instead of viewing it as a setback, as something that's taking you away from your ultimate goals, then I want you to view it as an opportunity, as in some ways a good opportunity to work on the weaknesses that got you here. And often with bone stress situations, there's an intensity in training that's gotten too much. There may be a fueling issue. There may be a nutrition or nutrient related issue. And often there's some biomechanical issue that's causing too much stress to go into your bones. And so I would encourage you to make sure you're consulting with a doctor to check on the blood work, but also a physio to make sure you're doing any physical therapy that you would need to make sure that you're strong and resilient and you've dealt with any biomechanical faults that might have contributed to this bone stress, which is going to make you faster and more resilient as you come back from it. So this is not a setback. In many ways, this is the biggest and best opportunity that you can have in order to build the musculoskeletal system that will be able to withstand the continued stress and load as you achieve or shoot to achieve the sub 230 goal that you might have. And so keep that all in mind. And in doing so, I think, in many ways, you have to let go of the aerobic fitness. Stop trying to hold on to it. A lot of people end up doing crazy cross training during windows where they have a bone stress, where they're on the bike, they're doing swim, they're doing aqua jogging, all that sort of stuff. And that might be appropriate if you're an Olympian who has to do it in order to get to an Olympic team that's starting at a certain time where the tryouts or the key meets are at a certain time and you have to maintain aerobic fitness along the way while the body's healing. For those of us everyday athletes who have the ability to create more space for recovery, I want you to let the aerobic system go. Focus on building the musculoskeletal system. The aerobic system will come back, but you can't rush it back. You have to rebuild from the beginning, reprime the system, rebuild the foundation, do it gradually. And if you do so, you will be able to build to a higher place down the road. Now that all being said, I do think you need to be very, very cautious about how you race. You said you've got London and Chicago teed up for this year. I would highly encourage you to let at least London go. We're already at a place where London is in jeopardy, in a sense. You know, you should really already be doing long runs of at least 16 miles if you're gearing up for London in April. And so you're already at a place where you should have already started and been ramping up for London. And so we're going to, if that's your goal, we're going to have to rush things to get there. And I'm not sure that taking a swing at London in subpar fitness or not quite the fitness that you want is going to be useful. So what I would say is I would rather you skip London this year, focus this entire spring on rebuilding that foundation in a smart and sustainable way. Again, focus not just on the aerobic system, but on the neuromuscular system as well. And then come back and yeah, I think you can do Chicago in October, but I would make sure that you're not forcing a time, forcing a goal. Maybe you get to a PR, maybe you don't. Rather I would let, I would want the process to dictate what you achieve or strive for in Chicago, with a focus on getting a solid, consistent, healthy training block under your belt, and then getting to the race, asking yourself, what's my fitness level? And then going to race your fitness level on the day versus striving arbitrarily for a number that you've pulled out of a hat. Then after that, I want you to take a break from the marathon and do what I just have talked about in many recent episodes, which is make sure you're working on the 5K and 10K distances. If you haven't already, make sure you're working on the half marathon distances and the equivalent goals for a 230 or sub 230 marathon, because if you're not able to run a 5K as fast as you need to in order to do a 230 marathon or a half marathon as fast as you need to in order to do a 230 marathon, then it's going to be a challenge. And so you need to make sure you're staying balanced. You're not just doing two marathons a year, but you're mixing it up as I often talk about, 5Ks and 10Ks and half marathons, so that you can really take a big swing at the marathon the next time you do it and go for that sub 230 goal. You are a student of the podcast, so perhaps you haven't forgotten that part, but I have to remind you, and you're the one that told me that you had two marathons this year. So that would be my answer. Pass on London. Defer it to next year if you can. Do Chicago. But with an open-ended set of goals. After that, take some swings at the shorter distances and half marathon distance before you go back to the marathon again. And then, I would say, one marathon a year. Focus on one big marathon a year to take the swing at that sub 230 goal. That's going to give you the best chance, because you need to make sure you're staying balanced at all distances in order to do that. And finally, Dan, I'll just remind you, I've been through a couple of stress fractures, one in my tibia, one in my heel, and I was able to come back stronger on the other side. I've known a lot of people who have been through that type of injury, who have come back stronger because they were patient, and they use it as an opportunity to build the system while recovering, so they come back stronger at a later date. You will too, but you have to be patient. You can't force it. You do have to let go of that sharp edge of fitness that you had before in order for it to come back to you. So with that, Dan, I wish you the best of luck. Thanks for the question. Hope you heal fully, and do keep me posted on that sub 230 goal, because I believe you can do it. Okay, next we have a question, actually, from Austin, Texas, from Sujata, who is an athlete that I coach here. She had a bunch of questions. I'm going to highlight two of them that I think might be relevant for this episode. She asks, VO2 max, I know this is a factor for speed. How much does it contribute? And how much can I really impact VO2 max? I'm aware of my VO2 max based on my Garmin and by using the HRV for training app every morning. But what factors influence and impact VO2 max? And what should this data mean towards my running training goals? Good question, Sujata. Typically VO2 max is best used as an indicator for how fast we can run a 5k or a 2-mile distance. So it's really indicative of your ability to run fast over shorter distances, at least for those of us that like to do marathons and half marathons. So it's not an indicator necessarily of your potential in the marathon distance or the half marathon distance. It is a contributor to your potential in those distances. But as you extend in distance, other variables become important as well. Particularly your ability to be efficient, both from a form and from an aerobic system standpoint. VO2Max is a measure of the maximum oxygen uptake that you can achieve. And it is best used as an indicator of 2-mile or 5k race times. Now on to your questions. First of all, I would say that if you're using your Garmin and your HRV4 training app as an estimate of VO2Max, it is just that. It is an estimate. It is an estimate based on algorithms associated with your heart rate while going about your day and also while using it during workouts. But that's just an estimate, and it's an algorithm that I think is generally inaccurate. The best way to get accurate VO2Max data is to actually do a VO2Max test in a lab where they typically, for runners, put you on a treadmill, hook you up to an oxygen mask, and they're measuring the oxygen as well as the CO2 output of your breathing while also measuring your heart rate and other data points in order to determine your VO2Max via a progressive treadmill test, where usually they start by increasing the pace to a certain point, and then they start increasing the incline to a certain point. You're holding those efforts for certain windows of time until essentially you reach failure and you tap out, and they're getting the data they need along the way. So that's going to be the best way to get an actual accurate representation of VO2Max. But the question is, what can I do with it? Well, the most relevant thing we can do with the data from a VO2Max test, because it will also give us our heart rate zones, is use it for heart rate zone estimation. So that, in my opinion, is the best and most important reason to actually get a proper VO2Max test on, so you know what your zones are, zone 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, so you know what your max heart rate is. And then if you're using a heart rate strap, then you can use that to accurately ensure that you are, in particular on easy runs, going easy enough to get the aerobic benefit that you need by staying in zones 1 or zone 2. It can then also be a corollary for you to use in workouts. So if you're trying to do a strength-based workout with tempo work inside of it, then that would be something where you'd want to see your heart rate reaching into the lower parts of zone 4, typically. And so it can be used as a test to really gain accuracy and precision around your heart rate zones. And if you're using an appropriate heart rate strap, then you can actually put that to work in your training. That's really the best and most direct benefit for having a test done like that. The second best is to really just measure progress and measure progress as you age. We all have genetic VO2 max levels that are essentially born into us. And those elites start with really unnaturally high ones. Those of us normal folks usually fall somewhere in the middle. And yet we can all improve our VO2 max by making sure that we're doing training appropriately. And typically what you can see is that you can improve your naturally genetically given VO2 max by anywhere from 30 to 40% over your starting point. And you can do that by properly balanced training using all the principles that I talk on the podcast. So talk about on the podcast. So what you will want to see if you're training and you're measuring your VO2 max is that you're seeing progress in that. Now again, the watch based algorithm based VO2 max data is not accurate or accurate to the level of precision that we would want. So this would actually be lab tested VO2 max that you would be seeing that progress over time on. And you would want to see if you were testing regularly and you were training appropriately that you would see that number go up and to the right in general. Now, as we age, as we get past 40, just like with muscle mass reduction, there's also a similar reduction in your VO2 max as we age as well. And so we're constantly kind of pushing against that decline by training rigorously as we age. And so it would also be a way of seeing if you're measuring it accurately via lab test, am I able to hold on to my VO2 max fitness as I age well, and so therefore my training is working accordingly. And so that would be potentially a useful thing to know so that you can make sure that you have the health span that you want as you get into the more advanced ages. Now, someone who starts training later in life is going to perhaps see that natural decline in VO2 max, but they may be able to offset that by appropriately amping up their training as they age. And so they may not necessarily see a decline just because they're aging. They may still see an ability for VO2 max to go up because they haven't tapped into the full powers of their aerobic training because they haven't been training as long. So again, these are all offsetting factors. Good training versus age will have an offsetting effect to a point. But what's my conclusion in all of this? You ask, why should I care about VO2 max? And if you're looking at it on your watch, the short answer is don't care about it. I don't care about VO2 max measured in that way via the algorithms on our watch or through our apps. That's how you're getting the data. I want you to ignore it, not look at it. Now, if you're getting it via a lab, then you can use that information to not only track progress in your training, but also to make sure that you have accurately constructed heart rate zones. If that's how you're using a VO2 max test and you're also working with a heart rate strap instead of risk-based heart rate, then that is a combination of things that can be a way to amp up your training, or at least to make sure that you're training in the right effort zones, particularly for easy running. But that's really the only way that using a VO2 max test is worthwhile and powerful. Don't listen to the data on your watch, Sujata. If you want to get it measured, get it measured in a lab, and then we can extrapolate from there the data and find a way to make it useful for you. So that's the first question. Second question, knowing when to push versus not push. I think it takes longer to recover as I get older, so it's challenging to know when I should push through the hurt on a workout versus when I should slow down or just do a lower number of reps. How do I know when I'm not gaining the intended benefit? Well, first of all, I want to point you to a couple of episodes I've already done, and then I'll give a synopsis. First episode to check out, episode 197, where I talk about when to press and when to rest, which is largely a discussion on this very question. And then there's another episode, episode 304, that where I talk about building your running intuition. So go check out 304 as well, because that's where I encourage you to build your gut instinct about making decisions like this. And I think between the two episodes, there's a lot of powerful context on this question. But it is a really good question, and it is something that everybody's going to wrestle with, who might be training. You're going to have those good days, and you're going to have those bad days. In general, though, I want you to think about this. When we are not in race-specific mode, when we are in priming phase, strength phase, when we are in taper phase, most of our training, that's about 75% plus of our training, then we should generally always be choosing the conservative path. So if it is not there on a given day, if you're sluggish for whatever reason, if you're not feeling a number of reps, or if things are falling apart on you, or you're not able to hit the intended targets for your workout, then in general, I want you to choose the conservative path. Now in this case, I know Sujata is as tough as they come, so I know she's not going to be taking the easy route just because she likes to take the easy route. She's not that type of athlete, and I would say most people listening to this, who care enough about training to listen to me talk about it, you're probably not weak-minded either. And usually, if the body's giving you a sign, then you should listen. So, 75% of the time in those non-race-specific phases of training, then the answer is going to always be, choose the conservative path. Fewer reps, slower pace, whatever it may be in order to make sure that you can complete the workout feeling like you didn't go to the well. And certainly, you can do really rigorous workouts with that in mind, but always finish like you can do one more rep and not. Because remember, when we're doing these workouts, we're usually trying to achieve a given effort. And oftentimes, you'll see workouts written such that you are asked to hit certain target paces in those workouts. Those target paces just correlate with effort. And just like we use heart rate to figure out whether we're in the right effort zone, we also use pace to figure out whether we're in the right effort zone. So on a given day, a workout may say run 5K pace. You may not be able to hit that. But if you're able to achieve 10K pace at 5K effort on a given day, then you are likely still getting the aerobically intended benefits of that workout, even if the pace is different, because the effort is king. So if that's true, and you get through the workout, and yes, you're slower, and maybe you do the lower end of the reps, because you're just not feeling it for whatever reason, you're still getting a benefit from that workout. Versus, if you forced it, if you forced the pace or you forced the reps, then likely you're digging a hole and getting to a point where the workout isn't becoming beneficial. Because in the case of forcing the pace, that means you're actually beyond the effort that you're needing to achieve success in that workout. And if you force reps at the end that your body's not ready for on the given day, then you're digging a deeper hole that will cause you to have to recover longer, or perhaps not recover, before you then go have to go do your next long or hard effort. So we don't want to extend recovery time when we're already working on a really rigorous plan. And so in those windows of time priming strength taper, always, always choose the easier path. Now, in the very specific mode of training, then that becomes a little bit trickier. Because there are times when we are getting to the very edge intentionally, in order to make sure that you have every last bit of peak in your fitness as possible. And so it starts to become a little bit different in terms of making those decisions. Now, you also have to remember, in the race specific phase, we are often trying to hit specific paces for a specific reason, so that we can make race pace feel easier when we do it on race day. And so you're gonna be given perhaps marathon pace work, or half marathon pace work, or 5K or 10K pace work, that might correlate to specific race paces that you're needing to hit in order to dial in to those paces. And so on those types of workouts, it might not be about effort, it might actually be about a specific pace in order to achieve a specific result. In which case, your bar should still be high, at which you back off on things. But you just want to be more precise with your pacing when you are able to hit it. So in this case, if you were training for a 10K and you had 10K pace work but you weren't feeling it, in that case the answer might be to back off completely. And not, in this case, maybe hit half marathon pace in order to hit 10K effort. But rather not do the workout, maybe wait an extra day or even flip it to a different week in order to get that 10K pace work in, in a spot that your body can actually absorb. And so the bar, in many ways, becomes more precise, but also higher, by which you do the work in the race specific phase. Again, that's when you're feeling really off. If you're just feeling a little bit tired in that phase of work, then that's when, again, precision is important, and it may just be that, hey, we're going to push a little bit more to hit the targets on the day, knowing that we are in that really all-important race specific phase, where we're trying to find that edge without overdoing it. And there's a fine line there. And that's where you have to listen to your intuition. You have to listen to your coach if he's available to you. But you want to make those choices. And yes, on the margin, you take a little bit more risk in the race specific phase, but you do so making sure that you can still bounce back and recover and get ready for the race to come. So that's a long way of saying again, in those non-race specific phases, err on the conservative side almost always. In the race specific phase, things get a little bit more complex, and that's where the decisions are harder. But you still want to make sure you're being smart and considering all factors as you build to the end goal. So there you go. Thanks, Sujata. Those were great questions. I think I've got time for one more. And this one comes actually from an Instagram follower of the Rogue Running Instagram account. She says, Love you guys. Would you consider doing an episode about running an osteoporosis risk? I'm a 41-year-old woman and doing about 40 now, and came across some research talking about risks with intense regular exercise contributing to osteoporosis. How much is too much? I have lots of questions. I know vitamin D and nutrition are very important, and I am nice drink trained three times per week. Anyway, though, I love all your podcast episodes. Regardless, thanks for putting out new episodes. I don't think this is a full episode, but I do want to comment on it here and say a couple of things. One, I'm not a doctor, and I'm not someone who is trained in medicine or in nutrition. So, I'd obviously be consulting those types of providers as well in this case, and it sounds like you're on that path. I will comment in general, though, and this would be sort of directed at any type of degenerative type condition like osteoporosis or arthritis that may seem like it's getting worse with exercise. In my experience, there's sort of two camps that you'll find out there in the providers that might comment on this stuff. There'll be one camp that says you shouldn't run because it's going to make it worse. And then there's going to be another camp on the other side that would say, you absolutely should run in order to prevent it from getting worse or to manage it as best you can. Because if you don't move, then you lose it, and it can exacerbate or accelerate some of these degenerative types of effects. And I would generally fall in the second camp. Now maybe that's obvious because I am a running coach, but I've coached a lot of athletes that have dealt with these types of things. And in general, from my experience in watching it, is that if you either move it or you lose it, that loading the body is good for these types of situations. Doing strength training, doing running, all of those things are good. And what level you can achieve is going to be dependent on your specific situation. What level you achieve will also be dependent on your ability and willingness to modulate the paces that you're running. So if you're doing things the right way and you're fundamentally sound about your training, meaning your recovery runs are super, super easy, your other easy runs are really, really mellow and easy as well. And then of course, your quality workout is balanced. Your quality workouts are once a week and balanced in a way that you're not overdoing it. And if you're doing those things the right way, then you're going to be able to do more than perhaps what would be commonly held by people out there. But you're loading the body, so that's important through the running. The strength training is important to stay strong. The nutrition which you've captured is important. There may be a hormonal component here that you should tap into with the right resource. So there's a lot that contributes to your ability to stay healthy through all of this. But I would submit that a good, well balanced, well managed, appropriately easy at the right times running routine will be a fundamental building block to helping you offset or at least slow down the issues you might face with osteoporosis. So I would encourage you to provide a provider or group of providers that tell you to do things, to tell you to move, that tell you to exercise, that tell you to run in order to work through it. Because there is a camp out there that lives in that space, and they can be partners along the way and help you navigate it with your individual situation. And maybe a part of that is a running coach who can provide one on one consultation, who can be a player in the mix as well to make sure you're balancing it all in a way that's healthy and sustainable for your situation. So that would be my advice for you. I wish you the best in the journey. I've seen a lot of people work through challenges like this and still be running strong. So I hope that is the situation you find too. But you're on the right path in asking these questions. All right. With that, all great questions will wrap this episode. Thanks to everybody who wrote in. Really appreciate all of these great questions. It's always fun to get to them. As always, you can check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Facebook or Instagram at Rogue Running. Until next time, happy new year. We'll talk to you soon.