Hey everybody, it is episode 67 of the Running Rogue Podcast. This is Chris coming at you from Austin, Texas. Steve is back in the room with me. Steve, how are you today?

I'm doing great, Chris. It's good to see you. It's good to be back to Austin, Texas.

This is an exciting episode for us because we get to be fans.

Yeah, I'm totally ready to fanboy out.

And we're excited to allow our audience to be fans and or potentially to become fans of our guests today. We've got Colleen Quigley, US Steeplechaser coming on. We'll do a little bit more intro on her in just a bit, but she is a four-time US team member now, once with the Olympics, three-time World Championship team member, including two outdoors and one indoor. And just a cool athlete to follow. I've always been a fan and kind of followed her from afar because of her ability to make teams and fight in some of these US Championship particularly. But recently I started following her on Instagram and have just been super impressed and refreshed with the authentic, genuine approach she brings to interacting with fans. So we're super excited to have her on, to just get to know more about what it's like to be an elite athlete, but also fan out on some track stuff with her.

Yeah, Chris and I did a little, in our prep for this, we listened to a couple podcasts she'd done with other podcasts, and she's not afraid to drop an F-bomb occasionally, so we're excited to tell her that it's an explicit podcast, so you may get a little color in this one.

So we'll have Colleen on in just a bit. As we always do, we'll start with some current events. We've got one past, one present or future to talk about in this case. It'll be past when you're listening, but let's start past for us. So we've got to talk about the New York half that was this past weekend in New York. They changed the course a little bit this year, so it was a little bit more challenging than usual. Took the usual spin through Central Park, but they had some other hills in the mix, and it was windy, so they had pretty good headwinds part of the way, but really solid fields. And we had our first American to win on the men's side ever in this race, Ben True, who was making his half-marathon debut. Ben has been a 5K, 10K athlete on the track, who has, I don't know, I'd say probably underperformed his potential and expectations, at least in terms of making teams and in major championships.

Yeah, I think he's been one of the best American distance runners in the country. He's definitely been there, but it seems like at world champs in Olympic trials days, something just doesn't go his way. Something just happens. He does have a tendency to lead, so the way that he decided to choose to run this race was pretty exciting.

So anyway, the races on both sides were fairly tactical. The men's, in this case, was a little faster than the women's, which is unusual as these things go. But the pace was dawdled early as nobody was willing to take the pace. This one picked up on the men's side at about mile 10 where Dathan Ritzenhine, who was racing his first major race in a Hanson's kit and getting ready for Boston, took the lead, tried to push and press away from everybody, got the field whittled down but could not shake the man, Ben True, who, as he said in his post-race interview, he said, look, I knew I was running with a bunch of marathoners and that if I could just hang on, I might be able to out-kick them at the end. And he did to win in 102.39 by three seconds over Dathan, who got second, and then Chris Thompson from Great Britain, who rounded out the podium there. Solid times on a really tough day. So kudos to Ben for getting this one done. It'll be interesting to see if this is a transition for him, if this signals a transition to potentially the marathon.

Well, you and I hope so, but he downplayed that in post-race interviews, didn't he?

He did, but I don't know what that is about. Is he just playing coy with us or if it's real? So we'll see, but obviously getting a win in a major race like this is a big deal. So that's a cool story. I think the Dathan Ritzenhain comeback of sorts, you know, is a good story. I mean, Dathan is one of the greatest US distance runners ever, has held the US 5K record at one point and has NCAA championships in cross country. I mean, he's just been around the scene for a very long time, but has struggled with injury, spent some time with the Oregon Project, that didn't go well, eventually moved back to Michigan and is now training with Brooks Hanson's distance project, training for Boston. To see him run a 102 in tough conditions, getting ready for Boston, makes me really excited to see what he can do there.

Yeah, I think it's gonna be interesting. It's gonna be interesting.

He's never, I mean, he's got, I think, the fourth fastest US Marathon PR, just under 208, if I'm remembering correctly. So, one of the best US Marathoners ever, but has always underperformed, we think, his potential there, because he's always been injured, had issues, he's struggled with cramping, struggled with nutrition, always seemed to have an issue in the marathon that he hasn't quite dialed in.

Some of his best races have been in the trials.

Yeah, so to see him with Brooks Hanson's, which is a marathon-focused group, teaching him the craft a little bit, it's gonna be interesting to see what that translates into. I mean, I don't think he can hang with Rupp and Jeffrey Karui, but he can squeeze on the podium in Boston if everything goes well.

I'm not gonna go quite that far, but I do think that we're seeing, this was a great race result from him. The fact that he went to the front, did the work, he's not concerned one bit that he didn't win the title, that he didn't win the race. He did what he needed to do to try to win the race, but he's gonna shake this one off and be ready for the big race. So, but I think he's gonna have a tough road to hoe to be able to be on a podium at Boston, but let's just say that-

He's saying he's got an outside shot.

He does have an outside shot. He is a Wiley, he's a good racer. He's got a great strategic head on his shoulders and he knows how to put himself into appropriate positions. He's not always able to seal the deal and finish it off, but we're Dathan fans, we're especially Dathan fans now that he's wearing a different kit. And so it'll be exciting to see.

Yes, and on the women's side, it dawdled. I mean, I could have hung with them for the first seven miles, which means they went slowly, folks. And it wasn't until mile eight, I think, that they actually started picking it up. Dez tried to push it a little bit at that point, but they went from running, I think they had a couple 555s, 556 pace miles, and then they dropped it to five, 15, 510, to close it out. And there's a few folks that tried to actually make the push. Ultimately, it was a pack of four that got away. And then finally two, and Emily Sisson, who we've talked about on this podcast, who got second last year to Molly Huddle, who won it last year, been a second to Bouze Deriba, Ethiopian athlete, who ran in it, and won in 112.23. Emily was one second back in 112.24. Solid result again for her. She started her kick a little earlier. It looked like she might take it, but then Deriba came around her at the end to take the win.

Yeah, Deriba's the real deal. So this was a huge race for Emily. I think she should be excited about it. I want, I just, when are we gonna see Emily run a marathon? There's no word on the, no word. I thought she may be Boston, which should be a sneak in, but they've done most of their announcing, haven't they? It's not gonna suddenly sneak in there. So, I don't know, it makes me sad that we won't get to see assistant debut in the marathon. But, you know, what a great result for her today, on that race day. The way that she took the lead, held on, and when she went, she blew the pack open. I mean, they put 20 seconds on the field very, very quickly. And I think for a little bit there, Emily thought she was gonna win it.

Oh, she did. It looks like it to me as I watched the replay. She just got leaned, yep. But still, really good result against a class field there. And also on the women's side, we got to talk about Desiree Linden, who was in the field. She ended up finishing eighth about a minute back in 113.30, which I think is actually good for her given how slow the pace was early on.

Yeah, I don't think we should look at it and say, oh, she's out for Boston, except that offline, you and I basically both said together we think she's out for Boston, but she's...

We'll save that for another episode.

This was not, this was absolutely not an indicator of her fitness. And if the race had gone faster, you would have seen her in the top four, in my opinion. You wouldn't have seen her at eighth place. It was just not a day.

She doesn't have the wheel change.

And she's too small to get in the front on a windy day the way it was. I mean, Emily's really small too, but Emily's just a powerhouse and Emily wasn't going to be, she was just going to do the work. Emily Sisson is not afraid. It's pretty cool, but.

Yeah, neither is Dez, but she just doesn't have the gears.

Yeah, she doesn't.

Which is the part about her that we worry about for Boston.

That's exactly right.

Because when it comes down to the end, she doesn't have the gears that Hussay, Huddle and Flanagan will have. So good race there. As always, New York Roadrunners puts on an amazing event. We had some athletes from our podcast training group doing this. So shout out to Greg and Ron, who both had solid mornings there as well in tough conditions. All right. So let's talk future event, which will be passed by the time you're listening to this. But this coming weekend, we've got the World Half Marathon Championships in Valencia, Spain. It's an interesting way they're doing it, Steve. I think this is cool there. It's a night event. So they're making it like a prime time event there in Valencia, Spain.

5.30 local time.

It starts at 5.30 local time. I think they're creating a little bit of a circus atmosphere around it there in Valencia, which is really, really cool. They're going to have people out, I'm sure, drinking whatever.

Sangria.

Sangria and wine.

Spanish beer.

Watching this. So that will be a fun atmosphere. On the men's side, and you guys can go back and look at the results and see how this plays out after you're listening to this, on the men's side, you've got just a crazy deep field. I mean, the favorite is Joffrey Comrower, who has won twice in a row, is going for the three-peat. But you have 19 guys who have run under 59, at least on the start list we're looking at today. So it's a super fast field. And so the question really to me for this, or two questions for the men's races, one, will Comrower get the three-peat? That's one question. Second question is, how will US athletes fare? Will this stacked field pull a guy like Leonard Carrier, who's in it for the Americans, to a really fast time, maybe even American record? What do you think, Steve?

Well, I mean, the half marathon on the roads is just the wild west of the world running circuit on the men's side. It's like, guys and men and women you've never heard of before, ever, before or again run times that are absolutely insanely, crazily fast comparatively. But not all of them can transition that to the marathon or down to the 10K. And Joffrey Kammerer can. He's done it multiple times. He's an absolute consummate performer and he happens to also be in another famous marathoners training camp. Is he not? Does he need to do his day to days pretty much with Mr. Kipchoge?

Yeah, I mean, I think that's within the last six months, but yes.

Yeah, they work together consistently and I think the pedigree that Kamora has, the fact that he's won it a couple of times and that he's won it many, many ways, and Kamora has this weird thing in the half. He has this ability to accelerate right near the end of the race down to obscene times, like 415 pace near the end of the race, he can accelerate and he doesn't have crazy wheels in the 5K, the 10K, but he's able to do it here and that's what's allowed him to win. He's one running away and he's one kicking away, either way. I think Ken Moore is the best of the field. Your second question about will the Americans get pulled? Let me just tell you, Lenny Carrier has done so many things this year that I would not have thought were possible that I'm just going to shut my pie hole and say, yes, it's absolutely positive that Leonard Carrier can break the American record. We know Galen got it recently, got really close recently. Carrier beat Galen in the fall, we saw, when they were both in marathon training, and this is a half. When Galen was in marathon training and Carrier was not in marathon training, this is a half. I think he's got a chance. He's got no chance to be on the podium, in my opinion, but I do think he's got a significant chance of maybe even getting below 59.30, maybe even getting down towards 59 flat if this race turns out to be as fast as it could. We saw the Chris, you and I like to do deep dives in this. We looked at the at the I looked at the elevation chart. It's flat as a pancake. The real problem is, I think might have been the reasons, one of the reasons they moved to 530 is it's supposed to be pretty windy that day. So we'll see what happens if that would those winds die down by the PM, which they have, which happens frequently, but should be an exciting race. It's one that I'll probably be watching live if I can. It may be time for me to drop my $85 or whatever it is and get my get behind the paywall, get behind the paywall for good for the year. So I don't have to just go to let's run to find out what the hell happened in the race.

I think it's safe to say that career is definitely your favorite of the Americans in the field. And I would expect him to lead our contingent, which also includes his teammate, Sam Chillinga, who's run 60 flat, low and Diego Estrada, who's in this one, old man Legat, moving up for his second half marathon, going for potentially the Masters World record that the great one, Haile Gibbers-Salasi already owns and controls. I think I find it hard to believe that he could pull that off. But hey, it's Bernard Legat.

If he gets to sit in a pack and do no work and he's around it with a mile to go, it's going to happen, but that's a, you know.

That's tough task.

Just for our listeners who may not know, as amazing as Bernard Legat is, you also have to consider that Bernard Legat runs nearly 45 miles a week, probably on max.

He's a 1500 meter specialist.

Specialist. He moved up to the five because he got older and he just did. The fact that he's had the second career making US teams in the marathon distance, just goes to show, number one, how wily he is. Number two, how just amazingly talented he is. And number three, the man isn't ready to be done. And there's, I am a fan of his for that. You know, there's a lot of other reasons I've not always been a fan of Bernard Legat, but at this point in time to see him still getting after it and going for it, it's really cool, Chris.

It is cool because he doesn't have to, ultimately. I mean, he's done everything you could want in this sport, medal at a global championship, set records, all that stuff. And really, honestly, I thought he would ride off into the sunset after his last 5Ks on the track, but to see him extended on the roads and not be afraid to extend himself to distances that really aren't his strength and to kind of be vulnerable, so to speak, as an athlete, it is cool. So I'm cheering for him. I'd love to see him at least scare that record a little bit, but I would definitely bet against it if I were betting on that in Vegas. In terms of the other Americans, we've got Jared Ward as well in the mix, as I mentioned, Diego Estrada, Sam Chalanga. If you were going to order those four after career, how do you think those American men would go?

I would definitely put Chalanga in there. And in fact, I'm not convinced that Chalanga isn't currently, right now, as good as Leonard Carrere is. Chalanga just hasn't proven his ability to find the finish line at the front yet. So I'm not convinced that it's not something that could happen, that Chalanga could beat Carrere. So I would put Carrere second. After that, I just don't think Diego Estrada has had, I haven't seen anything from him recently that indicates to me that he's ready to go. He was supposed to be ready to go at the Houston half, but he didn't show up, at least he didn't show up when the real racing needed to happen. And who did you say the other one was?

Jared Ward.

Jared Ward, he has also been a little less than optimally performing recently, but he also has kind of been out of it. I'd be interested to know what's going on in his life. But I just don't think, also, I don't think Jared Ward is going to be at the level these guys are. So I'm going to go with that in play, I'm going to go Americans or career, Chillinga, pretty far ahead. And then you're going to, who might be in a mix, might be in the mix to, though I think they might both go under 60, but, or be in a position to beat guys who are under 60. After that, I'm probably going to go with Old Man Ligot next. And then I'll put Estrada and Ward after that. I'll put Ward in front of Estrada, but that's the way I would put him. But to me, it's kind of like, why are we handicapping the 40th and 50th place finishers in the World Have Marathon Championships? But that's all good.

Fair question. For the record, I would agree completely with your order, which is bizarre that we would agree.

Highly irregular. Highly irregular.

That we would agree five deep in any ranking is quite a miracle. So let's switch to the women's side. This one is also a stacked field in a sense that has some really fast women in it, including world record holder Joycelyn Chepkoski, who's run 64.51 basically way the hell faster than everybody else, especially everybody else in the field.

She made men's Olympic trials in the US.

Yeah, exactly. So everybody else who's actually left in the field because we've had some other big women drop out, but still a really fast field with several women under 68 or close to 68. So you've got to believe, given that her PR is significantly faster than that Chepkotsky's got this one in the bag on the women's side. So to me, the most interesting question on the women's side is where will the Americans sit? And you've got Jordan Assay leading the bunch. How is she gonna take this? Is she gonna take it like she did the 15K and kind of run a more in your own groove sort of race? Or is she gonna use this as a chance to test her racing chops in advance of Boston? And then after that, we've got sort of a mix of, I would say, I don't know what to characterize it, but women that don't have a chance to compete for the top, but you know, are solid Americans. Who would be next on your list? We've got Becky Wade, Elena Taub, Emma Bates and Natasha Rogers, who is actually now out of the race with injury. Which one of those other Americans might be somewhere near the top of this field? So what do you think about Jordan?

I think Jordan, I don't know. I mean, my gut says she goes for it. Three weeks is plenty of time to get back. I think that perhaps what was being set up for her was the 15K, which was only what, a week ago? Was it a week and a half difference between this race and that race?

Two weeks, so it'll be two weeks.

So it'll be two weeks, so that makes a whole lot of sense from a periodization standpoint to run a 15K tough course as a prep for the next big half marathon. So with that in play, I think she's gonna go for it. I think she's gonna go out and try to run as fast as she possibly can to give herself that last final big race prep before Boston. It'll also give us a great ability to see where she's at. Hopefully we'll be really surprised at her time and her competitiveness here. So I think she's gonna go for it, Chris. In terms of who's gonna be there after, I mean, it's a pauper's grave. I mean, it's not quite what we're expecting. Although I will say, Becky Wade, we did talk about this right after the Houston.

I gotta say, Becky Wade will be in the mix next.

She'll be next, for sure.

She's still gonna be probably 70, 71.

And I think she'll be a minute ahead of the next woman after that. You know what I mean? And then it's just, who knows, exactly what it'll all play out. They're solid girls, they're learning. This is what, I got to do this, Chris. I went to my first world team, the only world team I ever made was a World Half Marathon Championships. And I learned so much. There was, in the middle of the race there, I literally looked over at a 50-year-old man and I was on PR pace. I PR'd at the 10K in the middle of the half marathon. You know, this is in Brussels, Belgium. I looked over, there's a 50-year-old Russian dude breathing like a freight train around me. And I'm excited because I just PR'd for the 10K and I'm absolutely heartbroken that there's some 50-year-old Russian dude who could actually kick my ass. I know now he was doped up on steroids and EPO and every other thing he could possibly get. But I didn't know that at the time. To me, it was just a fresh-faced kid out of college going, oh my God, it was only the second half marathon I'd ever run in my life. So, you know, for Emma, for Elena, and for Becky, this is not a new thing for Becky, but it'd be great for them to get in races. I'm interested to see what Becky's racing next. Like, what's next on her horizon? And we should think about getting Becky on the podcast.

She'd be a good one. We should talk about her book around the world.

Yep, and her life as a post-collegiate.

Yep. So, on the Jordan thing, though, here's a question for you. This race is coming four weeks out from Boston. Typically, if we're gonna have an athlete, at least in our programming, run a really hard half, all out half, then we like that to come a little further out, maybe six to eight weeks. I mean, there's a place for it.

I think you do.

Well, but there's a place for it. Okay, but what do you think? Do you think this compromises at all?

Not, I think it zero compromises, especially with, and now that I'm actually doing the mental backpedaling to go look and say, what happened at that 15K? Now I should have seen this, because I'm pretty certain what he's doing is he ran, he ran a reasonably competitive race, but decided not to push when Molly went for it, setting herself up, forget the wheels to turn over, to feel comfortable at the pace that she's gonna have to run, because I think she's gonna run a half marathon at the same pace as she ran 15K, which is fast, and that'll be a really great race. I think that's what's happening here, and she's got plenty of time to recuperate. I think she only needs three weeks. I don't even think she needs four weeks. I think three weeks will get it done, and they know what they're doing there. They'll have every recovery tool at her beck and call. She'll be ready for blood transfusions and all the other things that might be happening. Exactly, but whatever. They'll hang her from a tree, slap her with, have some Japanese shichitsu massage on her legs. I don't know what the heck they're gonna do. They're gonna do some crazy stuff on her, so she'll be ready to go.

I think to me, the thing that I would point to as the real thing or benefit from this is, it only makes sense to me if you're sticking your nose in the race, because that's what Boston's gonna be about.

If she doesn't, then I will agree with Hugh that it's a stupid, dumb move and I don't know why we're doing this. We don't need another world-class level tempo run that she could do with anybody and some boys could take her through, right?

Okay, so we're agreeing there, at least.

I'm getting ready for Colleen, I'm telling you. I'm getting ready for Colleen.

So, awesome, so there we go. So that's the World Half Champs. It's kind of cool to see, to me, for me to see the World Half Champs become kind of a big deal. There was a while there where it just kind of faded away and it was sort of like this thing where, you know, if you got on the team, you were kind of, you know, you weren't really that proud of it because it wasn't such an elite event. I mean, it's always been an elite event, but it wasn't as big a deal as it is with this year and the last several years. So, cool to see that energy back to it and to see Americans saying, hey, I want to be on that team. So, we'll see how it goes. You guys can check the results after you listen to this. All right, so now we're going to switch over to talking to our guest. As we mentioned, Colleen Quigley is going to be joining us to US steeple chaser. She has quite the pedigree. She's been a state champion in high school, grew up in St. Louis, Missouri. Was a 1600 meter and 3200 meter state champion her senior year in high school. Went to Florida State where she was an NCAA Champion in the steeple. And then obviously has now done very well as a member of the Bowerman Track Club, making four US teams at different levels. She's finished third three times in the US Championships at the steeple. Always behind Emma and somebody else, including her teammate Courtney Frerichs a couple of time and Stephanie Garcia back in 2015. But she's, so her track record speaks for itself. And she just, as I said at the top, she just seems like a really cool down to earth athlete. She, the big story you might hear about Colleen Quigley is that she was a model in high school and chose her running career at Florida State over becoming a model. We actually think that's a silly little footnote that you should ignore. It's a cool storyline and I think the media likes to focus on it because of that. But honestly, to me, that's the last thing that makes her cool, because she just seems like a cool person in general. So we're excited to dive into lots of other things with her and we'll get her on now. All right, Colleen is joining us. Hey, Colleen, how are you doing today?

Hey guys, I'm doing awesome, thank you.

Thanks for jumping on. I had a quick icebreaker question to start. I dated a girl in college who insisted that it was Missouri.

Oh, geez.

And she was from Festus, Missouri, and insisted that it was Missouri. What's your take? Is it Missouri or Missouri?

This is an ex you don't like anymore, right?

Right, right, exactly. No longer with this person.

Gosh, yeah, it's definitely Missouri if you live in St. Louis, but if you live out wherever, although Courtney under the bus, if you live in Nix in Missouri, it might be Missouri.

Nice, there you go. I never had the opportunity to visit Festus, but from what I understand, it wasn't a thriving metropolis.

Yeah, in the boonies, I'm sure people say Missouri, but everyone in St. Louis where I am from, we all say Missouri, like normal human being.

So we got that right, Colleen Nails from St. Louis, Missouri. Yeah, so we wanted to start with a big question, which is that, well, at first, just kind of generally, we want to start with just being fans with you. So you're now, and I screwed this up in my notes to you originally, you're a four-time US team member, three-time Steeple, one-time 1500-meter indoor, and really you're part of what we could describe as the greatest Steeple country in the world with you and your teammate Courtney and Emma, of course. And then on the men's side, we've got Evan Jagger and a bunch of Scott Simmons team, Emmanuel Bor and others that are competing at high levels on the men's side. So how does it feel to be the dominant Steeple country and be a part of that?

Yeah, it's amazing. I mean, when I graduated from Florida State in 2015, I went to USAs that year. It was my first time competing at USAs. And I thought I have a shot at making this team maybe. And I was gonna be my first time competing in the BTC Jersey post-collegiate. And I made the team and went to Beijing and that was so, so fun. And I definitely got a little taste of running on the world stage there. I was also exhausted by the end of the summer because I had done cross country, indoor. Outdoor, the whole NCAA season and then tried to keep going for another six weeks. So it was fun and very challenging. But yeah, ever since then I've made every team that I've tried out for and had a blast competing against Courtney and Emma and the other top women in the US as well as in the world. And I feel like it's a fun event. This people is a really fun event to be a part of right now. It's getting incredibly competitive on the women's side, still being so new on the world level relative to, something like a 1500. It's still in the baby stages, maybe it's a teenager now. And that's fun to be part of something that's growing and that high school kids are actually saying, I wanna be a steeple chaser. They're not saying, if I don't make it in the 5K, I'll run the steeple. They're saying like, I wanna run the steeple chase. And so that's really cool. And I love having kids reach out to me saying that they wanna try it and ask for tips and stuff. And that makes me feel really cool too.

It's also cool to me that you guys, ladies and guys seem to be owning it. Remembering Courtney's interview after Worlds, which was obviously amazing for her. We'll get to that in a second, but she was talking about who's the first American gonna be under sub nine on the other side. Which is awesome to see that kind of confidence. And so it's cool to be a part of that, right? I mean, we're talking about big, big things.

Yeah, people are opening up their very first steeples ever, opening up under 10 minutes. And that's a big deal, you know? If I remember my freshman, freshman sophomore year, I think it wasn't until my sophomore year, I broke 10 minutes and that was a big deal. And now it's like, oh please, like that's nothing. So yeah, it's really cool.

You know, Colleen, when I was coaching Marielle, I tried really hard to make her into a steeplechaser. So you might want to thank me for not succeeding at that.

I would have loved it. We need another Bowerman page steeplechaser.

Well, you can ask her about that. She'll probably say, I can't believe you told you that. I never wanted to do it. I refused to do it.

Any hurdles or anything, any drills?

No, she wouldn't even go there with me. I just knew she was an athlete and she was struggling a little at that time between being a real 5K person. Like she was that transition between 15 and five. And I thought, let's just do something a little fun and run a steeplechaser too and see what happens. I coached a lot of steeplechasers. I love the steeple. So I just wanted to see what would happen. And I was 100% sure she wouldn't hurt herself because she's a real athlete. But she was like, I will not even consider it. So I got shut down right away.

Well, it turns out it's good that she stayed with a 5K. She crashes.

Yeah, I think so. I think she's an Olympian. So what can you say, right?

So going back to that Courtney discussion, so obviously you were in the stands watching one of the greatest US distance races ever. And when Emma and Courtney went 1-2 last summer in the steeple at Worlds, you were in the stands because of a bullshit DQ, snapping on the line out of the water jump, which we won't even get into how ridiculous that is. But how was that being both a fan in that you're supporting these two amazing women doing amazing things, but also knowing that you should have been there in that final?

Yeah, it was so weird. Just a strange situation and I didn't see myself being in at all. The months leading up to that, that scenario never played out in my head. So then once it was happening, it just felt very out of body. Like, why am I not down there? And thinking like half of me is like watching the race and I'm like, dang, Courtney is like, she's sticking in there. She's just staying in. She's gonna have a good race. This is gonna be either amazing or a total blow up. Like, I don't know, going really well so far. And she just keeps, she's just sticking in, sticking in. She's right behind Emma, straight behind Emma. And then she like went into the last water pit in the lead. And I'm like, I just like looked at Kevin, my boyfriend sitting right next to me. I'm like, what is happening right now? And then it was like kind of like my heart just kind of like went out of my body. Like it just dropped to the ground. And I was like, oh my gosh, like amazing. But also it just made it like that much worse for me to be there and have to watch it. Like I just, yeah, it was like the perfect race for both of them. And I just couldn't even handle seeing. So as soon as I crossed the finish line, I just was like, I got to go. And I just like ran away. And yeah, just tears everywhere is horrible. But it was also just like, and it's such an incredible and everyone went crazy on social media. You know, everyone back at home was just like, this is epic, you know? And it was, it was so epic, which was so fun. I don't know, that part was really fun to watch, but...

Did you just have to shut everything out? I mean, if it were me, I mean, I think about silly examples for me would be like, if my team, the team I'm cheering for loses a big game, I'm devastated and I won't listen to Sports Center or Turn On Talk Radio, because I just don't want to hear any of it. And so did you have to just shut it out? It seemed to me like you would have to get away from it.

I subjected myself to a bit of self-torture for sure. And just, yeah, like watched everything. But that was probably not the smartest thing. And then after a couple of days of that, I was like, okay, screw this. I just have to like, yeah. Well, I also got food poisoning right after we went out to eat. I ate at some restaurant around the hotel. And later that night was just like throwing up all night. I had really bad food poisoning. And I was not drunk. I would just throw that out there. This was the night before the final. So I thought they were still fighting for my case at that point. And I thought there was still a chance that I could maybe run the final. And so I wasn't doing anything crazy. We just went out to get food. And later that night, I was like, oh, I just don't feel good. And I got sick all night. So I also had food poisoning. And then my boyfriend lost our fancy. We have this nice DSLR camera. And he left it on the tube because he was all stressed out and not thinking right. So it's like the worst week ever. But then I had to just put it all behind me because I still had to race. I got into the Birmingham 1500, just a short train ride away from London. And it was a Diamond League 1500. And so I was like, OK, crap, it's my first Diamond League 1500. I've never seen myself doing that ever. So I was like, I got to pull our shit together and not embarrass myself there. You know, I have another shot. And then I kind of did embarrass myself there a little bit. And then I had another race in Berlin. So I was like, I have to just put this behind me for now and focus on the opportunities I have at the end of the summer. And I also ran fifth half later that summer too. So yeah, just trying to put it away. And then kind of came back to it in the fall. But honestly, I was just ready to move on and start focusing on the next thing and put it behind me and just remember to never step on a god damn white line ever again.

So Colleen, tell us a little bit about, the listeners of this podcast are not, they may or may not know who you are because they're pretty serious runners, but they're not necessarily track fans. We do everything in our power to turn them into track fans, which is one of the reasons why we have you on this podcast because we know once they hear who you are, you are-

You're a track fan for sure.

That's exactly, there's no doubt. There's no doubt. But they all are serious runners. And there's a lot of training stuff we talk about on this podcast, but they're serious runners and they deal with disappointments too. I think they might really get hearing from you. You've have two different categories of disappointment, that the disappointments you sort of had throughout your collegiate career, where it took you a long time to win that NCAA title. You wanted at the very last chance you possibly could. And you went through, I like to say, I mean, you ate a few shit sandwiches along the way, right? I mean, you had some experiences that weren't great. And post-collegially, before you got out of college, you didn't get hurt very often, but you've been hurt. Little niggly, tweaky, weird things that have kept you out of some big races that have really tried your patience and tried you. So tell us how you've overcome, some of the things you may have done to overcome those disappointments and maybe how you even look at disappointments in the first place. Like, how do you frame it? And what do you do to try to say, okay, game on, next for game, right? What do you do?

Yeah, sometimes those things kind of come like gradually or it sneaks up on you. And then sometimes it's a really bad race and you thought things were going well. And then you just, you know, like I actually, my most recent shit sandwich is I qualified for Worlds in the 1500, which is my off event. And I made it to the final at Worlds, indoors. And I'm competing against the world's fastest 1500 meter runners. And so I'm like, I gave myself this amazing shot. I made the final. I have this great opportunity in front of me to show everyone that I'm more than a steeplechaser. And I just went out there and I totally fucking bombed. Like I ran the worst race ever. I was totally immature. I just let, you know, let the pressure get to me. And I was so disappointed after. I was so mad at myself that I had given myself, I teed it up, you know. I'm like, you're right there. And then I just whiffed it. And I know that that's something that, yeah, like you said, anyone has this kind of experience. Maybe training is going really well, and then race day you choke, or maybe training was going pretty well and you got the flu the week of the race. Or, you know, there's just so many things that could happen that on race day that you don't show up your best self, whether that's mentally or physically. And I've had a little bit of both of those things. I was physically prepared at Worlds. I was not mentally prepared. I've also gone into races where I was completely mentally prepared, and really not there physically. Because of injury reasons, I showed up to the Olympic trials in 2016, not physically ready. I had not done the workouts that I needed to do to become an Olympian that day, but my mindset was so determined. I was, you know, dead set on making that team, and I just put all the doubt behind me and just pushed forward and ended up third and made the team, even though, thankfully, I probably shouldn't have. So, you know, sometimes it's mental and sometimes it's physical, but for me, you know, it's a little bit of different things. One thing that I've found that really helps in the past year for the mental side is I've started to meditate. I think that can be a really great tool to get you if you're in a funk or if, you know, maybe you're trying to prep for a race or you're trying to get over a bad race, getting out of your head a little bit and finding some clarity and just finding, you know, peace with where you're at. And so, yeah, like this maybe isn't where I want to be right now, but this is where I am and just focusing on your breath and taking it one step at a time and then bringing that to your workouts. You know, maybe you have a five mile tempo, well, you can't think about the fifth mile when you're on the first mile. You know, you have to stay in the moment and that's what meditation's all about. And so I started to do that this year. I think that's been a game changer. So, yeah, I recommend that to anyone, no matter what stage of athlete you think you're at, if you're an Olympian or if you're a road warrior on the weekends.

We know you use Headspace.

Yeah, I use an app called Headspace.

Which is an app that we've recommended, yeah.

Yeah, we've recommended it multiple times. It sounds like you guys have a little thing going on with them. What's, what did you like about it?

I got to meet Andy Puddycomb. He's the creator of Headspace and he's the one whose voice is on all those guided meditations, which was crazy because meeting him.

He's amazing, isn't he? He's like the Zen master. Literally, I was like, okay, I'm just gonna pee down the side of my leg. I have nothing else to think about. But I'm just right in the space I need to be in. It's all good.

And when you meet him in person, he sounds just like he does in the app, which is trippy. But he is great. And so yeah, Nike has done this really cool collaboration with Headspace where the Nike Run Club app has these guided runs where you can use your phone or your Apple Watch and they have different guests. It's kind of like mini podcasts, I guess. It's Coach Bennett is the Nike Run Club head coach. Global head coach and he has these different guests on and they have conversations and they talk about workouts and training and breathing and recovering and all this stuff and they guide you through a run or they guide you through a workout. And so I did one with Andy and Coach Bennett and it was all about, kind of about my journey and then yeah, Andy was just dropping knowledge bombs on us about how to stay mentally strong and stuff. I was like taking notes.

So can we do an anatomy of a shit sandwich here for a second because I think it's interesting to hear you say that you choked at Birmingham and indoors because I remember watching your interview before Milrose, when you were really going into the want to make her mile and I was just like, damn, gosh, how is this person who's coming off of injury, who's been swimming almost as much as she's been running, show up at Milrose and be completely loose and confident and thinking, I can win this thing, especially when your teammate's there who had crushed at the year before and was a stack field. So like, how is it, compare and contrast that sort of mental state versus what happened to you at Worlds where you weren't in the right place.

Yeah, you've like totally nailed it. It's so funny. I felt like a different athlete that day. Just I was in the right headspace for that race. I was in the right spot mentally. I felt calm and relaxed and just, I was excited for the opportunity to race. I was like, I know it's gonna hurt, but I'm excited to embrace that and see how I can push myself based off the training that I have. You know, I only have what I have. I have the tools that I have based on how much I've run and how much I've swam. And that's just a fact. Like, I can't change that, but I can change how I approach it mentally and how I choose to control my thoughts during the race and not let that negative voice come in and say, oh, you can't do this. You know, you suck. You haven't done enough workouts. Kate beat you in that last workout, you know? And I have control of those thoughts most of the time. And so if those are gonna come in and totally sabotage my race as they could, that's, you know, that's kind of a game changer. And so, yeah, I came into that race just feeling like really calm and relaxed and excited. And then the opportunity kind of opened up for me and I just stuck to the race plan and finished hard. And then I almost got beat at the line by Kate. She snuck up on me and I was like celebrating as I'm about to break the tape and then-

Well, the tape was deceptively placed. The tape was definitely deceptively placed.

After the finish line, so I had to-

Yeah, you almost pulled a Molly huddle.

It could have been really embarrassing. Thank god it would have been just my teammate and it wasn't at a world championships like Molly's experience, but-

Yeah, the stakes were a little lower, but-

Yeah, the stakes were lower, but it would still have been a little humiliating. So how was it different than at Birmingham? Yeah, when I showed up to Birmingham, I was definitely way more nervous. I felt out of my element. I felt outclassed by these other really world class 1500 runners that had way more experience than me in that event. And so I think I just let all that get to my head and we jogged around for three laps on the indoor track, totally just jogging. And then with five laps to go, the top like three or four girls decided, all right, let's do this. And they just started sprinting like flat out. We finished 230 for their last K. That's a two flat 800. I was like, oh, I'm screwed. And so then I just like let that get to my head when they started sprinting. That was my thought like, okay, I'm screwed. And so then I just totally let them fly past me and then everyone was passing me. And then, you know, mentally, I'm just deflated. I'm like, I can't keep up with that. And then all of a sudden, oh no, I'm in last. And then I just kind of pretty much jogged it in from there, which was horrible. And I knew, like I had the mental clarity to know that what was happening and I still just couldn't figure out how to turn it around. So I'm not trying to say here that I'm, I have figured out and I meditated for three months and now I never make mistakes, like, no. It's not happening. It's still a work in progress. I'll always be a work in progress. But it is fun to have the good days and be like, yeah, that's what it's all about. But it doesn't mean you're never going to have the bad days either.

So tell us a little bit about what's happening there at the Bowerman Track Club in terms of the juju. Yeah, I'm so happy to have you. The energy. I mean, I think nearly every woman made an Olympic team that was on a starting line at the Olympic trials in 16. And we see, and those of us who follow you guys on Instagram, I mean, it's obvious that there's challenges and there's definitely head to heads. You never, the pictures that they decide to put up there are not ones in which everybody is like putting their arms around each other and kissing each other on the cheek, right? You guys are putting it to each other on the track. I mean, every time it's like throwing down, this is what we did today, it just happens to be in St. Moritz or it just happens to be in Colorado Springs or it happens to be at the beautiful Nike track. But talk a little bit about the camaraderie. We have a team here that we coach and a lot of the people that we work with are on teams. Talk a little bit about that team dynamic. And then maybe also, I'm not sure how much you're willing to go into Jerry Magic, but maybe a little bit about how Pascal and Jerry and the coaching scenario fit into all of that piece of how that all came together. Because you were a part of an incredibly, incredible collegiate program where Coach Harvey put together a team of disparate, like first women who were all kind of in a different spot, but they all came together. And you guys were, I was coaching at the NCAA at that time. You guys were bad asses and you were a fucking team. Yeah, we were. And now you're a part of another team. So talk about, we could talk about FSU in just a little bit, but talk a little bit more about like Bowerman, because I think most people want to know, what's that like? What's it like to be on that team? And what are those team dynamics like? And how do your coaches play into building what's there?

Yeah, we were the Bowerman Track Club. And before I joined the team, there were two Bowerman babes. I mean, the Bowerman babe thing did not exist because there was two of them. It was Shalane and Emily. And I talked to Jerry about joining the group because I knew through my own research that he was the coach, he was the guy for me. I thought him and Pascal both, with their success with Steeple Tracers, with Evan and Dan Hueling and Andy Bear. And I was like, that is where I wanna be. These are the steeple people. And so then the problem was, yeah, I'd come from this school that we had some really great teams and great teammates. And we have built this amazing group of supportive, competitive, but supportive. We pushed each other in practice, but we also spent like 24 seven with each other. And we were our own little sorority kind of. I know it wasn't in a sorority because I'm way cooler than that. But that was my sorority in college. Those are my girls. So, yeah, I valued that. I put a high, high, high value on that. And I wanted to keep that in my professional life. I didn't want to become a professional athlete that just trained by herself and had this lonely life. And I just had no, I love running, but I have no interest in that kind of life at all. And so I was like, I need a team. I need people I can train with and make this fun because it's not fun for me, at least by herself. So I told Jerry that I was like, listen, like Shalane's doing the marathon and Emily runs the 10K. Like I want no parts of either of those. No parts, not interested. I need someone who can like run fast. If I'm not running the steeple, I'm doing the 15. And I might not have been like so kind of strong.

Am I gonna come out of your mouth that way?

I can tell you about that when I was in college. But I said something like that. Like I just, I want a team of people I can actually train with and we need some speedy girls, you know? And so he was like, yeah, yeah, you know, I'm trying to build my women's group and yeah, I just, I don't know who it's gonna be. And I got my eyes on a few people and I'm like, all right, like who, like who are you interested in? And so he threw out some names and I was like, well, have you talked to them before? You know, have you reached out? And he's like, well, no. And I'm like, all right, well, like, can I do it for you? Like, can I reach out to you?

Hello, do you want me to be your agent?

I'm very like, yeah, I'm a very, I don't know, maybe aggressive, like kind of person. So I'm like, if it's gonna happen, I'm gonna make it happen. Like, let's do this. And he's like, he doesn't, he was afraid to like reach out to people. I think he'd rather them come to him and stuff. And I think a lot of girls were like afraid to talk to him. You know, he's the best coach in the country. He's very elusive, you know.

Well, there were a men's program too at that point. So there was no like window there, right?

I don't think he knew he was looking to build his, he says he was, you know, trying to build his women's program, but he wasn't-

In his own head.

Yeah, he wasn't advertising that to the world. So no one knew that. So anyway, I reached out to a few people and Shelby Huland being one of them. And she was, you know, I think I'm just gonna stick with my college coach, but maybe, I was like, well, here's his email. Like, if you just want to reach out, she ended up joining. And then we had Sammy Silva joined right before I did. She didn't have eligibility for that outdoor season. So she joined right before I did. And then we got Courtney the next year. And it was like, it just started growing this momentum to the point where, yeah, at the Olympic trials in 2016, we had seven women in our group and six of them qualified for Rio. And it was like, dang, now we're like a powerhouse women's group. It was like, just like that. One year later, all of a sudden, we were so strong and so deep and each athlete being so quality. It wasn't like we had any chumps on the team. So that was really, really cool. And we just keep building momentum from there. We've had, this year, we've added two more Olympians to our women's squad. And it's an incredible group, you'd think. You know, all these crazy good athletes would just bash heads a lot and have all these issues of being competitive on the track and people always trying to win workouts and stuff. But, you know, I always say this with zero bias at all, that distance runners are just the best people. And we all support each other and end up, I mean, it's not that we never bash heads or never like have snarky words to each other. When we spend, you know, six or eight weeks at a time at training at altitude together and living in one house, you know, working out all day today, cooking together, all that stuff, you know, there's definitely like do your dishes kind of moments. But, but we generally, we legitimately have so much fun together. And, you know, when we take time off and I go home or home for Christmas or whatever, I'm looking forward to coming back and getting back together with everybody and running together again. And we really do work together really well. I think that, you know, that goes for anyone as well. If you're kind of in a funk or you feel like training, like not having the best time with it, like there's zero chance that that's gonna happen. When you have a great group of people that are meeting, you know, we're meeting at four o'clock and we're gonna do this workout, that's gonna be way more fun than being like, I'm gonna finish work and then head over to the track and try and get my mile repeats in. Like, that's not fun. And I don't blame anyone who skips that kind of day if that's what they have planned. Like, I'm not blaming you for skipping that. But if you have a group of people waiting, you know, like what are the odds that you're gonna not show up? Like if they're waiting for you and they're counting on you to be there and take some of the reps and share the work, like you're gonna show up and you're probably not gonna wussy out in that workout either when they're counting on you to be there and, you know, lead a mile or whatever it is. So that's, accountability is huge with our group and just that we all have signed up to be here and put ourselves in 100%. We're all so committed and we know that if we don't wanna do this, like we don't have to. You can quit at any time. No one's forcing you to do this, you know. Your contract says that if you just decide to stop, like that's fine, there's no, you know.

Yeah, cause six Olympians are gonna quit, right? Cause six Olympians are gonna say, I think I'll just roll over and carry on. And I think maybe I'll go ahead and go work at Arby's or something.

I've got this fine, well-lasted one Olympics and I'm done, you know, got my taste of it. No, no, we, yeah, we all intentionally choose to be there and it's amazing. We all, you know, love our sport, but also love to do it as a group. And we know that it would not be the same if we are trying to do it as individuals, nor would we be as successful, I don't think, if we tried to do it as individuals.

You got eight Olympians. Four by my count have global championship medals. That's pretty legit. It's kind of like the Bowerman babes and then everybody else, with the exception of maybe Emma and Jenny Simpson. You guys are dominating the women's side as far as the US goes. Totally. What are the personalities like? Obviously, you've got a lot of amazing women who like to work hard together, but different personalities. So how do the different personalities add to the mix?

It's funny, so I'm definitely more outspoken, more, yeah, like if I think something or if I have a problem with someone or with something or, you know, whatever's on my mind is coming out of my mouth usually. And not everyone on the team is like that, for sure. Like some people hate confrontation, and you know, if they have a problem, they're definitely not saying it. And you'll probably find out another way, but you know, they're not gonna come to you and say it. You have to, that's just something and any group of people that you have on any team or like even any team in an office at a quote unquote normal job is gonna be like that where you have different personalities and they might not all mesh together perfectly, but you know, they also have different strengths and different things that they add that if we were all the same person, it'd be really, you know, really freaking boring first of all. But also, you know, that's just not interesting. That's not, we're way more diverse than that, which makes things more fun and we can learn from each other hopefully if we're open minded enough to do that and hopefully be able to take those things from the other girls that might be something that we should maybe, you know, emulate and learn from and be more like, maybe I should be more like Mariel and be more even keel and she doesn't get, you know, she doesn't get flustered about pretty much anything. She's super even keel, super calm person and that's a great person to be around, especially, you know, in stressful times.

It seems like Shalane's a little bit of the mom of the group.

Yes.

I mean, not any derogatory term whatsoever, but the nurturing way. What have you learned from her in your time training next to her?

Yeah, Shalane, I lovingly call her mama. She's our mama hen and she actually talked to me. She was the first person to talk to me before even Jerry did about the group. I had a connection through my college coach with her. My college coach somehow got her number email from me and I ended up talking to Shalane. Maybe that's what it was. I talked to her on the phone. I remember very vividly, it was a Sunday, she had finished her long run and she was telling me about her long run and she was just chilling the rest of the afternoon and stuff. I was like, I hung up with her and she was telling me about the group and whatever. I guess it wasn't even really a group then. She was just telling me about Jerry basically. And I remember hanging up with her and being like, holy crap, you know, I just had a conversation with Shalane Flanagan. She just chatted with me as if it was like totally normal. And that's just always you know, that's always how she is. She's just very, very casual and just humble down to earth and always willing to like share her knowledge because she does have a wealth of knowledge and experience that all the babes can really benefit from.

She seems so intense. For a long time watching as a fan from the outside in, you know, she kind of came off a little bit maybe cold, a little bit just really intense. She doesn't wear her emotions on her sleeves with fans, at least she didn't used to like she has kind of evolved to now. So she's very different, I would assume, you know, when you're kind of in the in the crew together there, so you know, what's that? What's that like?

Yeah, she's not. I think Jerry used to say, you know, when he was just coaching Shalane, he would say, I don't coach women. And it was like, showing doesn't count because she's not that emotional, like, you know, there's never tears on the track with Shalane. She's a metronome. And she's so tough, you know, like, so he could coach her. But he didn't think he could coach other women at that time. And that's just because yes, Shalane's no bullshit. She doesn't make excuses. She doesn't whine. She just, like, gets the job done. But then there's Yeah, there's definitely also another side of her where, you know, we're having a potluck or whatever with all the girls and she's, you know, amazing cook. She's got a cookbook out cookbook out now and another one coming out in the fall. And so she's very like, you know, that's a different side. That's a much softer side. And yeah, she's also can be really nurturing and, you know, supportive and sweet and kind in that way. So she's super tough, but that's, you know, she's multi dimensional. She's not, you know, she doesn't have that only that one side of her that's her racing side, but that's very helpful, I think, to her in racing, because she's just completely tough and she doesn't get emotional, which is really important when you're racing is to not get, you know, caught up in your emotions.

Cool. So Colleen, I want to ask you a little bit of a question, one question about all of our listeners are thinking about training. They're, they're, they're training geeks, right? They want to know what one person does, what another person does, why they do X and Y, they do Y. And we're big believers in miles matter. I'm not going to say we're super high volume all the time, but we're about that. You talk a little bit about the transition you had your father, we didn't talk about this earlier, but your father coached you in high school.

Yeah.

And then you had coach Harvey in, in your collegiate career. And now Jerry, your post collegiate career. And I'm sure that there are similarities and differences between those three coaches. And you're talk a little bit about maybe each one of those experiences from your perspective, right? Not necessarily the personalities of those people, but more along how those coaches brought a difference in training and what the load you carried, whether it was volume or it was interval or how, or speed or how those played out, where, where tempo fits into that. Not, not in some kind of big exercise physiology, you know, disposition, but more along the lines of Colleen Quigley's experience to become an Olympian and a world-class athlete and someone who's looking at meddling in the next Olympian. What's changed? What's the same and what's different?

Yeah, I think one big thing is just that there was a really nice natural progression in my training from high school till now. You know, I think at that time when I was in high school, there was less, I was less aware of what was going on with other athletes around the country, you know, not even really around the state. I didn't really know what other people were doing. You know, flow track wasn't as big then and I wasn't really looking at other people. We were just kind of doing what we were doing and my dad, I trusted my dad wholeheartedly, which is also really important. I've always had 100% trust in every coach that I've ever had and just, you know, doing whatever they say and believing that that was the best. I think that's a big part of it. But we just, I just followed what my dad said and we did, you know, maybe 30, 35 miles a week in high school. I always had took Sundays off and we hit some strength stuff. Like I remember doing maybe, I don't know, like a mile a time at tempo pace and we used the Jack Daniels formula to figure out all my paces, the V dot number and everything, which I think was a great resource then to try and give us an idea of what kind of paces I should be running. Because I think that's really hard for a lot of people to figure out what should tempo pace be and, you know, what should be running my interval pace at. And so we use that resource to try and figure that out. And then, yeah, I upped the intensity. I remember a lot in college, my freshman year, just being sore all the time, you know, because what we were doing.

Coach Harvey is known for tough, for everything, for everything all the time, right?

Yeah. Like doing my first progression run out at the cross country course, the ARP, and doing like six miles, I think, progression run where you're just steadily, you get faster every mile. And yeah, the seniors are out there, all of a sudden, I'm running with these all American women who, you know, just totally outclassed me, I barely made it to nationals my senior year of high school and stuff. So I'm like, Oh, God, I'm gonna die. And I definitely died for a while. And I think that's normal. You join a new team. When I joined this pro team, again, the same thing, ups the intensity, sore all the time. I'm dropped in workouts all the time. It's so much harder than anything I've ever done. And then, you know, gradually, this is my third year, gradually, things are getting easier. And we're adding new people. And I'm talking them off the ledge all of a sudden and saying, like, it's okay. Like, you're gonna get, you know, you're gonna get used to it. Your body just has to adjust. And it's different. The workouts are different. The workouts are harder. They're longer. They're more strength oriented. I do more kind of mileage on workout days than I used to. So then I'm trying to balance that with my weekly mileage and trying to figure out what's right. And, you know, that's a constant all that stuff, no matter where you're at in your career is a constant like juggling, trying to ride that line, you know, and do as much as you can and work really, really hard. But then also, like, don't be a dumbass, because then you're just gonna get injured. Like I've done quite a few times now, trying to do too much, trying to do all the workouts and all the miles and, you know, never take really good recovery days and run through little pains, little niggles, all of a sudden our stress fractures and stuff like that, where, you know, that type A bullheaded personality can really be a lot of runners have, I think can really be detrimental. And so, I've done that for sure and having, you know, a coach in college who, if I had a little niggle, she'd be like, okay, we're not hurdling today, but, you know, in the pro world, if I just have like a little niggle, you know, my coach now is going to say, well, like, it's up to you. Like, do you think you can do it or not? You know, can you work out?

Or suck it up. Or suck it up, buttercup.

Good or not, and I'd have to just say, like, I don't think I should do it today or, you know, maybe I can't like maybe I'm just being a wussy. Maybe I should get through it and just push through it. And so that's, you know, that's a call you kind of have to make for yourself and you have to know your body really well, which is hard. It's hard to know, to know your body and know what it's telling you and know when you're pushing it too much or when you're just being a wuss. So that just comes with it, I think.

People forget that when after Shalane won a bronze medal in the Olympics, now upgraded to silver, she switched coaches from Coach Cook to Jerry. Cook was a very different model, more quality based. And then she had the foresight to know that if she wanted to do what she wanted to do, then she needed to make that change. It took her 18 months to two years, if I remember right, to really adapt to Jerry's program before she started hitting her stride again.

Yeah.

So any type of transition is going to be hard for even the best of the best, right?

Totally. And that's just the transition. You have to say, this is what I chose that I wanted to do. And I chose that for a reason. And you just have to stay committed to it. And don't change your mind or change your goals halfway through the process just because it's hard. And just stay the track. Stay the course. You know, you chose this for a reason. And I think that's kind of true for a lot of struggles in life.

It's oversimplifying it dramatically to say that Jerry is a high mileage guy or a strength-based coach. I mean, that's clearly oversimplifying it. But you added volume, clearly, moving into his program. So what have you learned about finding that balance for you in terms of total miles versus cross-training and how to get to that level that's right so that you don't go over the edge?

Yeah, it's been definitely a little balancing act because, yeah, I've dealt with a few injuries now in my pro career and trying to do all the workouts and then recovering in time for the next one and ended up in the pool a lot. I'm still trying to figure that out. Right now, I've gotten to a point where I can run a decent amount of miles, do all the workouts, but I'm still supplementing with swimming in the pool. Over the summer, I was running about 65 to 70, maybe 72 at the most, miles a week, and doing two to three hours of swimming a week with 30 to 45 minutes segments at a time, three, four times a week, and then working out two to three times a week, and doing weights three times a week to help maintain and avoid injury as well. It's a combination of all those things, and then all the little things too, like as soon as you start feeling sore this or cranky achilles or whatever, getting on top of, hey, I got to go get my treatment appointment now and not wait until next week when it gets really bad. It's a combination of all those things and just knowing when to back off a little bit or take a couple less miles and a couple more miles in the pool. That's kind of the balance that I've come to right now. Hopefully as I get older, I can handle more miles, as my body adjusts, I can handle more miles and less swimming, hopefully.

Cool. I want to change directions and I'm going to throw a quick question at you. Ruth Jabet.

Yeah.

What's up with that shit? How you feel about that?

I mean, no surprise, right? Like, I'm not sitting over here shocked, that's for sure. It just sucks. It sucks for Emma. It sucks for everybody. We saw her switch allegiances to Kenya to Bahrain and we were like, well, that's shit. And then, you know, she came out and she's doing EPO and it's like, well, that's shitty. You just, you know, someone like that, I don't understand the to your band thing. I would just like it to be one and done, especially for things like testosterone and EPO. You're done. Bye. Never come back to this world ever again.

So like Ajay's situation of maybe eating tainted meat, you say, okay, we'll give you a little window, right?

But there's other stuff, it's like weird gray areas, like weird things that it's like, maybe that was not legit. Like if you can test positive for EPO, that's you're done. I'm gonna get all worked up.

There's something really wrong there. There's nothing happening in natural fruit products. There's nothing.

You're intentionally gaming the system, cheating your way into an Olympic gold medal, stealing someone's moment from them. You're freaking done. Never come back. We never want to see your face again. I'm just gonna get all riled up about this.

Well, we already, you can rile. We're on the same page.

So how do you deal with that mentally? I mean, I'm not an elite athlete. I don't know what it's like to stand on a starting line knowing that somebody next to me is probably a drug cheat. But how do you reconcile that with all the work that you do and you know you're clean, you know you're doing it the right way? Or is it somebody who's taking shortcuts next to you?

It's frustrating. And I can't even imagine how Emma must have felt when that came out. She was probably like, yes, I knew it. I had a bit of that too, like I knew it, yes. But also, she must just be heartbroken because that's not only glory that she missed out on but I'm sure money that she missed out on and it's just hard to stand on the line and do your best and then just hope for the best, hope that they get caught later. And I don't even know if she'll, I don't know if they've said, yeah, if it goes back to Rio or not. I haven't, I don't have the latest, but yeah, I guess you still have to just get on the line and do what you know you're capable of, like, you know, you have all these workouts that are giving you, it's giving you feedback about where you're at and you do your best and then hope for the best. And, you know, sometimes you have to finish the race and know that some day it's going to be better. But for now, it is what it is. And as long as you know everything and you've run clean and you trained hard and you competed hard, then you know, you really should have no regrets.

Well it does make it as a fan, knowing that there's some of that out there, it does make it sweeter when Emma wins the gold, right? Because, you know, she beat dirty athletes on that day, including Richie Betts.

No disrespect to Emma, but somebody did decide to run for some boneheaded reason about 100 meters further and then back because she couldn't figure out how to stay on the track in the appropriate way. But anyway, but Emma did do what she needed to do that day and took advantage of the opportunity that she had. And I think that to me is like, and Courtney did as well, and I'm I am 100% certain, Colleen, that if you were on that line, you would have done the exact same thing. You would have taken advantage of that race and done what needed to be done.

Well, I think there's a lesson there, like you said, is like taking advantage of the situation because you're right, there was weird stuff. You know, I didn't get to be there. There was a chick who forgot the first water barrier, the first steeple ever.

No, not just a chick, but the girl who's probably the de facto favorite who should have won the race.

You're right, the favorite. And then there was a big fall somewhere in the middle too and like took a few people out. And so it was one of those races where like Courtney and Emma both had this opportunity kind of open up to them and they seize the day. I think that's an amazing, you know, something to take away from it that if something like that happens to you, even if you're not planning on meddling, if you're all of a sudden in the position to meddle, like don't like think to yourself, oh, I wasn't supposed to meddle. They didn't tell me I was going to meddle. I'm not seated in the top three. You just say, well, this is happening and you just go for it anyway and you know, shock the world and it's awesome. And just don't back down from a door opening that you may not have expected to open.

Well, I love the fact that both Emma and Courtney talking pre-race before that, talked about how they were going for it.

Yeah.

I mean, so they just, they made the decision to put themselves in that position for Madden to happen and it did. And it's such a powerful lesson for all of us.

For sure. And it doesn't always work out. Like I'll put that out there too. Like you might say before the race, I'm going for it and you go for it. And, you know, on the day, you know, the favorite didn't forget that water pit and she also crushes it. And it just doesn't happen for you on that day. And even though you went for it and you did everything right, you still didn't get a medal. And that's okay too. You know, that's also a great story to tell, but at least you did everything that you could and you, you know, gave it your best shot for the day and you can still go away from that meat being really proud of what you did.

Let's talk about Emma for a second, because you raced her early in college, you got second to her at NC's your sophomore year, have been third behind her at USA's three times now. I was in Hayward when you made the Olympic team in 2006 and I remember going around or coming down to the rail, you know, as you guys were coming around and high fiving fans and taking pictures and stuff and I remember Emma sort of being like, hey, guys, we got to take pictures now and she was kind of shepherding you guys through the process of the victory lap and she did the same for Courtney after they got medals, she was like, hey, we got to go get her flags now. So what's it like to compete against her? Somebody who also seems to be doing it the right way, who's an amazing competitor in her own right, but also seems like a great person. What's she like? What's it like to compete against her?

Emma's always been a role model for me, like you said, in college competing against her. She was definitely a notch above the rest of the field whenever she competed in the NCAA. It was like, it was a race for a second, my sophomore year for sure. And we didn't even think about Emma, we just like let her go and then we did our own thing behind her. And then, yeah, to be on the same team as her in 2015 was a huge honor because I didn't really know her at the time, just, you know, like, hi. And so it was like, oh my gosh, like, this is really cool to actually, I got to hang out with her a little bit and like actually get to know her. Emma's a class act, always has been, always very gracious, very humble, down to earth, you know, she doesn't have a big head at all. And so that makes it really, really fun to compete against her because we're in a lot of the same races or going to be, you know, always competing in the same in diamond leagues and at USAs, at Worlds, at the Olympics and stuff. So we're going to see each other a lot and it would, you know, it always sucks to have to kind of like be fake friends with someone, but it's nice to be able to be real friends with Emma because she's a super fun competitor and friend on the track for sure.

You know, I think one of the things Colleen that's so impressive right now about women's distance running in the United States is that almost every woman that I see on the starting line wants the woman next to them to be the best athlete they can be so that when they do beat them or when they do compete with them, they feel like they're at that level. That's never going to happen on the men's side. Men are just jackasses. They don't do it the same way. So, talk a little bit about being, you are now in as an Olympian at 25 years old in what will be considered in the next 50 years, the absolute heyday of women's distance running in America. And perhaps it'll get better, but if it doesn't, or even if it stays the same, you will be a part of something that's absolutely a game changer in a sport. And yet, you all look at each other, you give each other hugs, and I've been at a lot of start and finish lines for collegiate athletes with women, and they are not necessarily so excited about hugging the other person next to them. But at the elite level, at the top level, those women who are making Olympic teams, that sort of esprit de corps is there. Tell me a little bit about what it means to be representing America and looking at the other women that are going to represent America and how that all plays into some kind of historical moment. And maybe you're a little young to do that, but I don't think you are because just talking to you over the time frame that we have, you kind of got your shit together and you're a little bit more mature than the average. So do you recognize your place in history? What does it mean to be a part of American history in that way? And how does that play out with the competitors and things? That's a big question. But anyway, I like to throw those big ones out.

Totally. Well, I mean, the girls that the women that compete against, I feel a deep respect for because, you know, I don't feel like there's any of these, like I fully do trust none of them are like doing EPO or testosterone. And so that makes it a lot easier to have respect for them as athletes and then get on the starting line and say, hey, good luck. You know, whoever I'm standing next to on the starting line, you know, when we're waiting for the gun to go off, it's always like good luck, good luck to whoever's on your right and left. And they say it right back because they want you to be at your best because they want to beat you at your best. If they're going to beat you, they don't want you to show up to the line, you know, oh, I've been injured and I'm not at the top of my game right now. They want you to show up ready to roll. And so that's really cool. And then when you get to the finish line, you know, no matter what happens, if you had a good day or bad day, you're not, I mean, typically you don't just like storm off or, you know, leave the track. It's always high-fiving, hugging, you know, good job, good day, like how to, or turning around and how to go, oh, yeah, five second PR, awesome job, high five, you know, so happy for each other when there's like those little victories like that. Even if you are competitors or, you know, not necessarily on the same team. But I think that's really cool. And I don't know that a lot of other sports really have that, not to that level or to that extent. So it feels awesome. And then you never really feel, I don't know, really pitted against other people, which makes it fun. Definitely. I'm still competitive with other people. I have people that I'm like, I'm not going to let that Gator beat me, you know, like really, really? No, for sure. Whenever I tow the line with a Gator, I'm like, oh, I'm running against a Gator today. You know, I got to get her. But then you cross the line, it's like, hey, good job. And you really do mean it. You know, you want them to compete at their best and you want to beat them at their best, like you said. So it is really cool. I hope one day we get to look back on it and be like, yeah, it was part of something that was really special.

Yeah, it's definitely a reason to be a fan. It's just cool. When you guys are fans of each other, then I think it translates to the fans that are watching or that are starting to watch. And it's just really fun to watch. And I wish the men's side had some of those same elements. I know it exists in pockets, but it's definitely more cutthroat. And you know, once you're done, it's like, I'm out going to the mix zone or whatever. But anyway, I want to talk shifting gears again about bullet journaling. Yeah, you recently put out a newsletter on this. I saw it on your Instagram. And to me, it's super cool because it's a really practical and tactical way to get specific about what you need to do to accomplish your goals. So talk about bullet journaling, what you do with it, how do you use it, and how can people use it in their own training?

And just before you start, I have no idea what the fuck Chris is talking about. So give me a little perspective.

Yeah, I like that, practical and tactical. Bullet journaling is something my little sister who's way cooler than I am told me about. And she was like, I'm going to do this thing, you know, it's called bullet journaling. And I was like, okay, what the heck is that? So she sent me this video on Facebook that we really will never use again because delete Facebook. But yeah, she showed me this video and she was like, you have to, you have to watch this and it just explains the whole tactic. So it's basically a blank journal and it has either grid pages or dot pages and you get to make it however you want. So if you're really into like lists or if you like planning, you like making your own calendars, your own schedules, I make a month, a month page for every month where you have like what's going on for the entire month. And then my sister, because she's in college, will have every week, she has her own page for every week and she writes down her assignments and different things that she has going on for that week. And I don't do one of those, I don't like take it that far, but she does it like that. And then some people even take it like they have another page for every day. And they'll have like that day schedule or to do's for that day. I don't have that much going on in my life, I guess, I just like don't need that. But you could take it that far if you wanted to, and then just list like books you want to read, books you've read, movies that you want to watch, places you want to go, restaurants you want to go. And so I have all these different things going on in there. And one of my favorite things is we've already mentioned is the habit tracker. And so this is something that I put into my newsletter because I posted it on my Instagram story, like my habit tracker or pictures on my habit tracker. And people are going nuts. Like, what is that? So many people responded. I could barely even respond to all the messages. Like, what's that thing that you posted? You know, how do I get one of those? And I was like, well, first of all, like, you can't get it. You have to make it by some colored pencil.

It was definitely an art project.

Yeah, you just get a blank dot journal on Amazon, basically, is what I did. And then you just go on Pinterest and you just search bullet journaling and there will be a plethora of ideas and you get some colored markers, you just go to town. But if you would like all the details, a little plug, you can just go to my website and subscribe to my newsletter, it's called the Steeple Squigs Update. And I will send you all the information from my bullet journal.

What a feed girl. Just feed girl.

Well, she missed the most important point, which is the URL is colleenquigley.org.

And I'm proud to say if you Google my name, it's the first one that comes up.

The one and only.

I don't know about the first base, so I've been working very hard. I saw it.

I saw it. I mean, just to simplify the picture for you, basically what I saw a picture of was habits across the top, basically a column for each habit. And then you had the days going down the left with the grid pattern so that you're basically filling in each box for each day that you did that habit.

Taking score.

Taking score. Did I do? Did I take my iron today? Did I do my PT? Did I do the meditation? And so it was just a way to remind yourself visually, hey, these are things that I need to do to accomplish my goals.

Yeah.

God, that seems to be impractical.

Everyone has their own color. So you can kind of color throughout the month. You can see, oh, there's a lot of blues and not so many of those purples. That was my stretching one. I haven't been stretching or taking my iron. And I've been slacking on that for the past week now. I haven't been taking my iron or whatever it was. And so, yeah, like you said, it's just a tactical way of showing how you're doing. And I know those things are, you know, if I miss a couple, if I miss a couple days throughout the month, taking my iron, it's no big deal. But it's when you start to kind of see a trend building of not doing something. And I also have some that are habits of not doing. So not drinking or not having sweets are two things that I get to fill in the bubble when I don't do them. But most of them are, yeah, I get to fill in a little square when I do them. And I just do that every day at the end of the day for what I did during that day, on that particular day.

It was really cool. I shared it with my team. And the part of being cool, of it being cool to me was the fact that you're not perfect. There are empty squares in there. You didn't always do everything. And you know, sometimes you eat sweets.

Yeah. And most of them, I don't have to do every day. I just really want to be careful because things like sweets, okay, I talk about this all the time. So like one day, you know, you have a hard workout and you have a cupcake after workout. And guess what? Like the next day, nothing happened. You didn't gain five pounds from eating a cupcake. You still had a great run the next day. There was no immediate consequences of doing that. So all of a sudden, you're like, well, I'll just have another cupcake. And so you have a cupcake again the next day. And then the next day, you're like, well, that didn't hurt. So then you have ice cream. And then all of a sudden, you're having dessert every single day. And then it starts to add up and actually starts to be detrimental to you. But if you don't see how that's building and seeing how like, oh, I used to not eat sweets and now I have a dessert every night, you can kind of watch that progression and then put the pieces together and hopefully fix the problem. So yeah, it's not like I never eat sweets, but I just don't want to have sweets every day. So I watch out for, you know, the slippery sliding slope of just, oh, now all of a sudden, you know, I'm drinking alcohol every night and not just like once a week.

Okay, since you mentioned food, can we talk about your approach to managing nutrition and how that fits with all these miles and laps you're doing, but then also, you know, what's with Steeple Squigs granola? When is that going worldwide? Where can we get it?

Yes, I was hoping you'd ask me about Steeple Squigs granola. That is my side. I'm calling it my side hustle. I started making granola last year and I studied nutrition in college at FSU. I majored in nutrition. And so that's definitely a passion of mine. I think it's a huge part of the game as an athlete, a big tool in recovery, in performance. I know I feel better, I run better, I work out better, I recover better when I'm eating well and giving my body all the nutrients that it needs. Not only like eating all the vegetables, but also not eating. Sugar is a huge inflammatory food. If I'm trying to recover from a workout, eating a bunch of ice cream is not going to help my muscles and all my fiber, all my tissues recover faster. Stuff like that I'm definitely really good about and most of the women on our team are really aware of. One thing that I do is during the season, I don't really eat sweets. I have some chocolate, some dark chocolate if I'm really needing it, but I try not to have dessert during the season and my go-to, quote, unquote, dessert is Greek yogurt, non-flavored, just like the plain Greek yogurt. And I put granola in it and that's my dessert after dinner. I just want something else after dinner and so I'll have that. And then I started realizing that these granolas that I was buying were jam-packed with sugar. And I was like, no, this is the whole point is to get rid of sugar. And I didn't realize there was sneak in the sugar in there. So I decided I'm just going to make my own and then I can totally control what was in it. And so I started making my own granola and my boyfriend was like, this stuff is so good, you have to sell it. And so that's what I'm trying to do now. I'm trying to create a business, it's called granola, with capital R-U-N in the middle, to emphasize that this is made by runners for athletes who are trying to eat something that's delicious and nutritious and doesn't have all these hidden sugars and gross ingredients that are really not necessary. It has lots of nuts and seeds and has coconut oil and it's sweetened with maple syrup. So I'm in the process of making it available on my website. I've gotten a commercial kitchen here in Portland that I'm using to make it and I'm working on packaging and labeling now. And then I have to find someone who can make it for me when I'm gone the entire summer in Europe racing. So that'll be my next challenge. But I'm hoping to have it up soon and I will definitely be letting fans know as soon as it is here, my Instagram, my newsletter and all that stuff.

Granola. I love it. Just don't eat unhealthy amounts of it, right?

If you eat a whole bag, it's still not really healthy, but that's kind of true of anything.

Your boyfriend has unfortunate weight gain due to unhealthy amounts of granola. We hear.

He's like, this is healthy, right? I'm like, oh, you just had the whole tray. No, no, no.

Yeah, two pounds of granola is still calories.

A half a cup is the recommended amount.

So I have one final question for you and we talked a lot about being fans. We're fans and I'm sure at this point in time in this podcast, every listener of the Running Rogue podcast is currently a Colleen Quigley fan. I am sure of that because we know our listeners. Tell us a little bit about how you look at the business of your sport and what you're looking at in terms of how you make your fans happy. Not in the gratuitous, oh, I'm looking at this as some kind of financial benefit because currently you're not getting any financial benefit. But you obviously have an end game here, right? And you have a plan. I think our listeners would love to know what your plan is and why your plan would make them a fan. You know, because that's we're we're trying really hard in this podcast to get people to think about our sport and beyond the marathon, right? I know you already know what that's like that people ask you only. Are you have you ever won the Olympics? Have you ever won the Olympics? And have you ever run a marathon? And those are the only two questions anybody ever asked. But what are you doing to make them aware? And what do you what do you think is crucial for them to think about that can get them excited and motivated about being fans? Because honestly, that's what it's all about. Because if we don't do that, the next generation is going to have a harder time no matter how much you influence them.

Right. Yeah, the thing I love about social media is that I really feel like I have been able to connect with these people that I have never met before. And for some reason, they have chosen to follow my career and to watch my Instagram stories and comment on my pictures. And they're with me when things are amazing and I make the team and they're so happy for me. And then they're also pissed when I get dequeued unfairly out of the prelim at Worlds and they're sending me messages and they're just as worked up, you know, about it as I am. And that's incredible to me because I haven't personally met a lot of these people, you know, like they follow me and they feel like they know me because I post these silly stories on my Instagram about what I'm doing that day and I'm letting them know what I did for training and what's going on in my life. And so they feel like they know me, but I don't actually, you know, I don't actually know them. And I think that's a really cool opportunity and I'm definitely having fun with that and using that energy because, you know, if I can post about what I'm doing that day or maybe I had a crappy day and I'm like saying, well, that workout was a struggle. And, you know, didn't really crash it today. And then someone watches that and they're like, okay, cool, like, I'm doing fine. Like my workout yesterday was crap too. Or maybe I'm saying something about I'm doing in the gym and that inspires someone like, oh, dang it, I haven't done my rehab exercises in three days. So they go out to the gym to, you know, work on whatever they needed to do. And if I can even inspire just a few of those people to do, you know, stick to their goals, make bigger goals, bigger, scarier goals, you know, sign up for a 5K or whatever it is, that's really cool to me. Quick story, I'd met this girl in Birmingham, she's in high school, and she lives in Birmingham, and she's like this huge fan of me for some reason. She found, I don't know how she even like found me and started following me, but she sent me a message in my like message, and was sitting in my message request, and I didn't see it for a couple days. As soon as I got to Birmingham, she messaged me, she's like, I really want to meet you, I'm like your biggest fan, and I didn't see it for a few days. So then she got all of her friends in high school to comment on my photos, saying like, my friend Alexis messaged you, go look at her message, and I was getting like 30 comments on my photos about this Alexis girl. I'm like, okay. Yeah, what the hell. So I went in and I found the message, and I told her, come to the track. She didn't have a ticket for the race on Saturday, and it was sold out. And so she's like, I can't get in, but I'll wait outside. And when you come out, I'll be there, and I was like, okay. So I had this crappy race, and I wasn't, you know, I was not happy. I was like, peeing myself up, and I left for my cool down. You know, my coach, Pascal, was trying to be like, it's okay, Colleen. And I was like, I can't talk. I just have to go do my cool down. And I just walked outside, and I'm like having a pity party. And I totally had forgotten about this girl that was going to be there. And of course, she was there, and she was waiting for me. And she just totally changed my whole mentality, because she was so excited to see me. And we took selfies together, and I gave her one of my USA t-shirts. And she was just like, she totally changed. I was like, whatever, who cares about this bad race? This girl is inspired. She wants to come to the US and run in college in the US and get a scholarship to US college. And she just was so cool and so nice. And I was like, oh, God, like, how could I even feel sorry for myself for one second? Who cares about this one race? I'm making an impact here. And that is way more important to me. And I was just kind of rejuvenated to be like, I got to keep doing what I'm doing. Like, I'm doing something right here. I just have to stick with it. This was a bad day, but it doesn't really matter. Like, I'm going to keep going and keep being someone that people can look up to. Because that was really, really special to me. And just like all the messages like that I get, people asking for autographs or just high school kids asking for advice like, hey, I'm in the pool, I'm injured, I'm being a mermaid right now. You know, I need some advice or support. And like people would come to me for that. That seems pretty cool. So I guess that's kind of the end game is to be a positive role model for young girls who are trying to find their athletic journey and figure it all out. And hopefully I can be, you know, a positive role model in that way.

Check.

And that brings me so much.

You can consider it done, continue to do what you're doing. As fanboys over here, like we literally, it's, you're doing your, that story is gold there, Colleen.

Yeah.

It's literally why you do it and why, I had no idea you were going to tell that story, but it's why I asked the question that it just feedbacks, feedback loops, right?

It's like, this is a British girl.

I mean, it's a British girl. She's not from Birmingham, Alabama. That's not that far. She's from Birmingham, UK, right? Right.

So, but it's feedback loops and it's what, I mean, it makes me work harder and me, you know, I got to keep doing what I'm doing and keeping better. So she's helping me as well as, you know, I'm hopefully helping her. It's just like you said, it's a feedback loop. It's not, it's not a one race street.

This is going to sound weird coming from a 38 year old man with three kids, but I get jealous about French Braid Friday because I could do it because Steve actually has longer hair. I mean, I say that in a little bit of jest, but I'm like, that's just so cool to me that you're able to catch.

French Braid Friday. It's catching on.

You're able to connect with high school college girls that are feeling like they're on your team and they're on a team together going and crushing workouts on a Friday or whatever it may be. And that's, I don't know, to me, that's what this sport, our sport needs is the ability for somebody like you to connect to people at all levels of moving through space, to feel like one big world. I mean, we all have the same challenges. I mean, we've all had injury. We've all been cross training because we've had to work through. We've all suffered, struggled with, you know, too many cupcakes on consecutive days. I know, I know that's one I struggle with. So anyway, it's just, it's just cruel to think about it. It's like, we're all in this together. And so that to me is a really cool way to manifest it in your own way with your fans.

Thank you. I have had so much fun with French Braid Friday. For any listeners who don't know what it is, every Friday I try and post a photo of me in a French Braid or two or three. And I've been trying to get other people to do it and hashtag French Braid Friday to let me know what breeds are doing. And this whole idea of, you know, look good, feel good. The French Braid doesn't make you faster. Like you are who you are and you've put in the work when you step on the line, you're going to go crush it because you have the right mentality and your body is primed and fit and ready to go. Obviously, the French Braid is not, you know, I don't believe in superstitions about if you don't braid your hair, you're not going to run well. I don't believe in that at all. But I do believe that if you look good, you feel good, you run fast. And if a French Braid makes you feel fierce and, you know, ready to toe the line looking, I look like a badass right now, then go for it. And you do look like a badass and you are going to crush it. And I want to see the pictures and cheer you on. And so that's what people have been doing. They've been, you know, sending the Instagram stories and posting on their Instagram feed and hashtagging French Braid Friday. And it's so much fun to see. It makes my day. I'm looking forward to Friday already. It's tomorrow.

It's the symbol that, hey, we're all in this together.

So yeah, I think it's cool. With hair long enough can do it.

You don't have a problem with boys getting in the game because I got some long hair. You'd be surprised.

Steve can pull it off.

It's so fun.

Yeah.

You got to learn how to do it for your girls.

So last question, just because I want people to be able to follow you this year. What are the goals for 2018 and what's coming up?

So this year for outdoors, there's no world championships. There was world indoors a couple weeks ago, but we don't have a world outdoors this year. So we still have USA championships in June. And then the schedule will be for us to go to Europe and train. We're going to go back to Switzerland. The Bowerman Babes are going back to St. Moritz this year to do some altitude training in Switzerland and then some races in Europe. And I think the Diamond League final for the steeple is in Brussels this year, which will be fun. And hopefully I get to run in that. So I'll have to compete in some other Diamond League races throughout the summer in order to qualify for the final. And then hopefully I'll round up the year after running some steeples and some 1500s and setting some personal best. I will hopefully end up the year with another 5th Ave mile in New York City, which is this road race they do where they let you just run for a mile straight down 5th Ave. And it's so fun. And like the best milers and 3k women, 1500 women in the country go and run this race, this road race. And it's at the end of the year. So everyone just does it as like a last hurrah and then ends the season. There's a big party after.

I'm one of the big 5th Ave. mile fan. I watched my first 5th Ave. mile in 1978 on the sidelines. So yeah, it's a big, big thing.

It's a huge thing. It's so fun. I did it for the first time last year and now I can't wait to go back.

Got some work to do to derail Jenny Simpson though. She's she's kind of got that race cornered, right?

How many times does she want it now?

But anyway, thank you Colleen for joining us. It's been so awesome. Really appreciate your willingness to just be open and candid with us about what you're thinking and we'll definitely be cheering for you this year in 2018.

Thank you. And yeah, you guys are amazing, ask amazing questions, very insightful. And I definitely think that what you're doing to kind of bridge that gap between pro runners and like our little track world and just a normal everyday runner who wants to be a part of that is really special and something that we need more of.

So with that with that in mind, every one of our listeners needs to now become go to go to Instagram and follow Steeple Squigs, that's right, that's for sure. Sign up for the newsletter, colleenquigley.org. And let's prove to Colleen, let's prove to Colleen, we've got a little social media weight here people. Come on, let's go. We don't do ads, we have no ads. So this is literally, you are our ad right now. This is brought to you by the Bowerman Track Club, colleenquigley.com and Steeple squigs.org. Let's get it right, we are going to do it right.

Awesome, thanks Colleen.

Well, thank you so much, have a great afternoon.

Well damn Steve, that was awesome. I think Colleen just went to the top of my list as favorite interview. Definitely real and giving you the straight scoop on everything track and field and everything about what it means to be an elite athlete. Thanks again to Colleen for joining us. Thanks to you all for listening. This has been episode 67 of the Running Rogue podcast. As always, you can check us out at Rogue Running on Instagram, Facebook and Twitter or at roguerunning.com. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.