Hey, everybody, welcome to Episode 354 of the Running Rogue Podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung, coming to you from a warm day in Austin, Texas. Happy summer, everyone. I'm recording this on Day 2 of summer, and excited to be with you again. This episode is going to be based on a topic, a combination of topics, actually, that was submitted by people who emailed me this past week. So I wanted to first thank everybody who sent me messages, got a bunch of messages, really nice messages, as well as a lot of good topics and questions. And this episode is going to be a result of that. We're going to be talking about balance. Balance from both a life and running perspective and how do you fit it all together. Let's try to chase your goals. And two, balance from a performance and health perspective. How do you balance finding that edge versus doing things that are good for health and longevity? Because sometimes those two things are at odds and competing with each other. And we're going to talk about finding balance in that way as well. I've got five thoughts in both categories. So we'll get to that in just a second. First of all, wanted to make a few notes as we enter today. One, this is the last chance to register for the Rogue Renegades, the virtual online group that I coach. It'll be open really just for a couple of more days. I'm recording and releasing here on June 21st. You'll have until June 23rd to jump into that group before I shut it down, and it won't open again until January. Again, this is my online virtual group training that will help you prepare for fall races. Really anything from September to January, any distance, 5K up to marathon. We've got training options in the group for you. If you're interested, gotta get signed up right now because that's about to shut down. One thing I wanted to emphasize there is that group really is for that more experienced athlete who is used to or had history running more than 40 miles a week. We also have another group called Rogue Rising that my often co-host on this show, James Dodds, coaches with another coach of ours, Kerry Dyer. That group is called Rogue Rising really for that person who's newer to the half marathon and marathon distance, particularly who's used to doing mileage below 40 miles per week and maybe wants to build. So that group is called Rogue Rising. It's going to be open past this deadline that I just mentioned. And so you'll be able to jump into that if it's right for you at any time. You can check both groups out by going to our website, roguerunning.com, click on the train button, and then you'll see another button for virtual group training. So go check it out. And if you're interested in working with me via the Renegades, jump on it now. Additionally, I wanted to call out and point you to the fact that the US Olympic track trials are starting actually tonight in terms of the distance events. As I record here, the Men's 10,000 will go off tonight. There's a bunch of prelims as well in different distances. And we've got events between now and next Sunday with just two off days in the middle. You're gonna have a lot of great track between now and next Sunday, June 30th. So go follow along. One thing that's cool to me about the track trials is just that ability and opportunity do be inspired by the elites. I think one thing is true is that, at least as I've seen as a coach, is that we have much more in common than we think with those athletes that are racing fast on the track or on the roads. They suffer the same way we do. They have goals just like we do and insecurities around those. They're testing, finding and testing their limits in the same way that we are. And oftentimes they have the same doubts, anxieties, fears that we do. So there's a lot that we share with anyone who might be striving to be their best in the sport from the elites competing there in Eugene for the next 10 days to the front and all the way to the back of any pack in any race that you might experience. So tap into that inspiration that you might see from the elites. There's a lot going on there. You can go check it out mostly on NBC and Peacock app. You can also stream it, I believe, via the nbcsports.com page. Kara Goucher, my friend, will be on the call for most of the distance events. So she's one of the best to do it from that perspective and always helps us connect and relate to those that we're seeing out there. So go check out and get some inspiration from the US track trials. A great prelude to Paris coming up later this summer. And then the last thing I wanted to mention before I jump in is just simply that my sponsor for this episode is Johngee. They've been working with me now for over a year. Great running apparel company. I'll talk more about them mid episode and get you a discount code. So stay tuned for that. Okay, let's jump in. Again, we're gonna be talking about balance this episode. Balance both from a running and life perspective and how do you make it all work. And two, balance from a performance and health perspective. How do you find that edge while also staying in a safe and happy, healthy zone for you? Those things can be at odds. So we'll talk about that as well. I got five points on each side of that discussion. Before we get there, I wanted to give you a couple of notes. One, just go check out episode. If this topic is interesting to you, go check out episode 194 as well, where I talk about run life balance. And hit some of these topics as well, and have some other points in that one that might be worth considering for those that are particularly interested in the first half of this discussion on balancing running and life. But also wanted to just mention some preamble items that I think set the tone for this discussion well a couple. One is this idea that we are born to run. There was an interesting article recently on Outside Online via Alex Hutchinson, one of my favorite fitness writers, journalists who talked about a new anthropological study that connects the concept of persistence hunting to basically old cultures from all over the globe. So there's new evidence to suggest that no matter where your ancestors came from, the concept of persistence hunting was likely a part of your DNA, which is this idea of basically chasing game, chasing animals until you have a chance to kill them by wearing them down in that way. And that's something that humans have done since humans have been on this planet and all over the globe. So running and movement and long endurance type work is in our DNA. And I think in general, in our society today, we tend to, because of all the amazing things that allow our lives to be sometimes easier and more convenient and the technology associated with that, we have a more sedentary and immobile lifestyle than perhaps was required to survive by ancestors way back in the day. And so, therefore, we've lowered the bar, essentially, on what we're capable of because of what we see immediately around us now versus what might have been required to survive and just to eat way back in the day and in the early stages of human development. So that's an important note to make, which is that basically most of us can do more than we think we can or more than the averages say we can or more than governing bodies might recommend for us. You know, the US government might say that you should exercise 30 minutes a day, four to five times a week. Well, yes, you should do that, but ultimately what we know now is that not only can we do more, but we should be doing a lot more. So you wanna make sure that you're setting the bar high for you when it comes to the things you can do, the workload you can withstand, and ultimately the goals you can set for yourself, set them higher than what you might see immediately around you or what might be the baseline recommendations you're getting from bureaucrats out there. And so that's sort of one point to kind of back all of this up is that we can do more than we think. And as a coach, I see this all the time. I coach literally hundreds of athletes who have crazy jobs and kids and all sorts of things going on in their lives who are able to maintain a pretty high level of training by being creative about how they fit it all in. And by the way, training becomes a source of energy and health that equips them to be stronger in their work life, in their family life, in their relationships, whatever it may be. So point one in my preamble here is make sure you have a high bar because we can mostly do more than we think. Point two in my preamble is this idea that there are seasons of life, and that's absolutely okay. So this sort of brings in the opposite perspective to what I just shared, which is that there are reasons to give yourself grace, and there are seasons of life where it's gonna be more challenging to be consistent with your running or to set goals in a certain way, and that's absolutely okay. And I've seen a lot of people have seasons of life where they've had to step away from rigorous training for whatever reason. Could be having a kid, building a family, could be a career shift that's created more work hours and more stress, maybe more travel than normal. Could be a period of needing to focus on other things for health reasons, for family reasons, whatever it may be. And there are a lot of people that go through those seasons and those seasons could last a few months, a year, five years, 10 years. I've had people take 20 to 30 year breaks from running and then come back to it at a later time and still be able to not only get back into it, but get back into it well and enjoy it and set new goals. And maybe even for some get faster than they were in their first season of running in life. And so that's just another word of encouragement that, hey, there may be a season for you that's going to cause you not to be able to train as rigorously as you want. And that's normal and okay. And if that's your season, then embrace it. Let running de-prioritize for a period of time knowing that's always going to be there for you. One of the things I have to remind myself sometimes is that running serves me, I don't serve it. Perhaps that's a weird way to think about it, but I need running to be what I need running to be. And there are times when I need it to be something that's more casual, more about stress relief, that's not providing pressure. And other times it's great when it's that time, when it's that thing that provides competition and pressure and gives me the opportunity to test and press limits. There's a time and a place for both of those things, and it doesn't have to always be one or the other. It can ebb and flow. And if you have those windows of time where you need to de-prioritize it for whatever reason, that's beautiful, that's okay. It'll be there when you need it. And during that time, make running be whatever you need it to be. And we had the example from last episode about the woman who was thinking about another child and worried about being able to get in another race and get in a certain goal before that happened. And I encouraged her to take the long-term view and not rush it. And I think that's in general the approach with running in life is don't rush it. When it's there, take what's there. When it's not, it's okay if you de-prioritize it a little bit. Yes, try to stay as active as you can. Keep it alive. But if you need to pull back from the rigor of it, that's okay. There will be something on the other side of that season. So that's my second point in this preamble. Both of those points kind of presenting the yin and the yang of this challenge that were presented by this episode, which is that we're trying to find balance. We're trying to find that happy medium, that yin and yang, that fits in a way that's sustainable. And yes, we are born to run, and yes, we can do more than we think, and yes, we can do more of a volume than we think we were born to be endurance athletes. But at the same time, life has its challenges. You can only do as much as life allows, and it's okay if sometimes that ebbs and flows because of the pressures and challenges that we face in life. And that essentially is a good way to tee up this dilemma of how do we balance life and running, and how do we balance finding the edge and getting the most from each performance with long-term health and longevity? These are the questions of the day, and I'll give you five thoughts to think about on each, starting with balancing life and running. And I wanted to shout out Mikhael here. He's the one that teed up this question, this topic for a show. So thanks to Mikhael for the email. He clearly is facing some perhaps young children in his life that's causing him to have to be creative about balancing that running routine with having young children. And that's one example of what this looks like, but I'm sure there are many others among the listeners out there. But let's break it down. Got five thoughts to think about when it comes to balancing running in life. The first is establishing routine, but sometimes as needed being creative with that routine. I think routine is so, so critical for homeostasis in general in life. And routine is key in terms of establishing a consistent fitness movement running routine. You want to be able to replicate what you're doing day by day, week by week, month by month. And that doesn't mean that every day has to look the same, but in general, I want people to establish a week long routine that is pretty consistent. And Mondays don't have to look like Tuesdays, but Mondays should look like other Mondays. And Tuesdays should look like other Tuesdays on balance. And yes, there's always exceptions to every rule, but the more you can establish a consistent routine, the better you're going to be at executing on that routine, full stop. What's your Monday look like? What's your Tuesday look like? What's your Wednesday look like? What's your Thursday look like? Friday, Saturday, Sunday, where do the key things fit normally? And if you can establish that routine and stick to it as consistently as possible from week to week, then you're gonna have more success at getting in your work than not. And that means answering things like where do your long runs fit from week to week? Where's your quality run? Where's your medium long run? I've talked about on other episodes how to assemble a weekly schedule that has all the key components of building long-term fitness. Those are three of them. Fourth being where do your recovery runs sit? That should be consistent. Then where on top of that does your strength sit? And how is that sitting consistently from week to week, both in terms of time and in terms of place and modality and perhaps who you're running with to hold you accountable at each step of that routine. It's so, so critical. And then on top of that, as Mikhael pointed out with his point, sometimes you have to be creative about where those things fit in or how it's going to fit in to your life. In his email, he talked about potentially running with a stroller if that's what you need in order to get it done with young children. The jogging stroller was an absolutely critical piece for me when I had young kids. Had a single stroller, had a double stroller. I ultimately had a triple stroller too when we had three. Very rarely used the triple, but I got a lot of use out of the single and the double stroller, being able to kill two birds with one stone, take the kids out, maybe they would nap while they were in it. And I got the run in while I gave my wife a break, potentially. And certainly, I didn't do my workouts with a jogging stroller, although I know people who have done that. But I would do my recovery runs, and that was a great way to force myself to slow down, because I was pushing a stroller, while also being able to kill two birds with one stone, watching my kid and getting in the work. Something that's more current for me now, from a creativity standpoint, is actually getting in my workouts during practices. I've got a lot of soccer practices happening in my household with three different kids and playing that sport. And so sometimes for me, it's about getting my run in while my kids are a practice. So I can kill two birds with one stone, drop them off, go for a run, and be done by the time they're done, and then head back home. That's what we're talking about when it comes to creativity, is finding those moments when you can squeeze it in quickly, or perhaps might be strength for you and wondering how you can actually get in a strength routine. I had an old coach, John Shrop, who had young kids when he was coaching me, and he would talk about doing some basic body weight stuff broken up throughout the day in different windows where he had time. So he might do some calf raises while standing in line at the grocery store, waiting to get checked out. He might do some basic squats while on a conference call, listening to others talk. And he would just be creative about getting in a set of some basic body weight activity at different times, maybe taking a 10 minute break from his desk, would get up and quickly do some lunges next to his desk so that he could squeeze in an activity here or there throughout the day on a given day per week. And while he didn't have time necessarily at that stage in his life to do one cohesive strength routine, 30 to 45 minutes at one time, he was able to break up six to eight exercises throughout the day at different times and just being creative about where those fit. So establish a routine, be creative with it. The more consistent you can be with that routine, the better success you're going to have. Number two in this part to me is critical, which is something is better than nothing versus the all or nothing approach. I think sometimes we get in this mindset that if we can't do it, we can't do it fully. We don't want to do it at all, or we don't try to do it all. And then that can build on itself where you miss one day, you miss two, then you're like, oh shoot, I'm so far behind. And you can't even get back on track. And then you miss three or four instead of just getting out there and doing the next thing you can do in the next day. And so I always emphasize the fact that if you can run at all, keep your routine. Something is better than nothing. So if you can't do five miles on your schedule, do three. You can't do three, do one. If you can't do 45 minutes of strength, do 15. Always, always, always something is better than nothing. And if you can maintain that baseline of activity through a day, then it helps not only keep momentum, but also keeps you from losing. And this, by the way, applies also across seasons of life where for whatever reason you can't have rigorous training, but you maintain some baseline of three to five days a week, of three to five miles at a time of running. If you can do that as a baseline during a season where you can't focus more rigorously on training, then it's gonna mean that you're able to much more quickly get back to where you wanna be when you restart again, cause you're not gonna be going to zero. So keep this one in mind. Something is always better than nothing. And as long as you don't think about training as all or nothing, then you'll be in a really, really good spot. So get something in when you can't get it all in and you'll be in a better place. Another thing I wanted to mention here is periodization. You have to periodize the windows of time where you're focused on something at the highest level. It isn't sustainable to be 100% on it for 52 weeks a year. It's just not. You have to let it ebb and flow. That's important physically, as we've talked about many times on this podcast, but it's also important mentally. So if you go into a 20-week training block and maybe you're doing a couple of those a year, that's 40 weeks of rigorous training. You've got 12 weeks around that. And so we'll talk about both within a training block where you're gonna have a priming phase, an aerobic strength phase, a race-specific phase, and a taper phase. The time that you're going to be most on it, most riding that edge, is going to be a six or seven-week max race-specific phase. In the other phases, you're going to be working, but you're gonna be away from the edge, erring on the conservative side, perhaps doing less than more. But then when you get to that point where you need to be sharp, you need to really fine-tune, in those six or seven weeks, that's when you really commit to doing everything right, staying closer to the edge, when in doubt, pushing a little bit more versus backing off. And every other period in that 20 weeks is going to be a little bit less intense. And so if you have two big peaks in a year, that's only 12 to 14 weeks where you're really 100% on it and staying near that edge. The rest of the year, yeah, you're working, you're building, but you're staying safely away from the edge to stay healthy in order to make sure that you're building appropriately to those race-specific phases. And then in the other 12 weeks where you might not be preparing for a race specifically, you're in maintenance mode or you're giving yourself a break. Couple of weeks after a marathon to maybe take completely off or just run super mellow as you feel like it. And then that window of time, you're focused on some other things. So when we talk about building and putting together a year, if you're periodizing appropriately, both with your on time and your off time, then that's not only giving you the physical ability to take a break, but also the mental ability to take a break because we just can't be on it 52 weeks a year. You have to have those breaks. You have to have vacations when you're taking training a little bit less seriously. We can't physically stay on it and on edge for 52 weeks, and mentally we can't either. So we have to periodize the work so that it all fits together in a way that's sustainable. If you're not doing that, then it's gonna be very, very hard. And most likely, you're going to break down in some way, either physically via injury or the mental breakdown of sorts, which in this case would be called burnout, where you just get burned out from training and you don't want to do it because you lose that motivation when you're trying to stay on the edge for too long. So periodization, absolutely key. A fourth element here is knowing your pressure release valves. Talked about this before in the podcast, but we can only train as hard, we can only do as much mileage as we can recover from. If you got nothing else going on in your life, then you can do more than if you've got a whole bunch of stressors pushing on you as well. And so you have to know, because life ebbs and flows, you have to know what are the pressure release valves and how can you pull them in a way that doesn't attract, that minimizes impact on your life. And you're training on your fitness while also maximizing your ability to get that breathing room, that air to find that sustainable place. So what are your pressure release valves? I want you to know them so that you can pull them when you need to. What are some examples of that? So in our world, we have two up weeks and a down week in our three week cycles. So one pressure release valve, for example, is during those down weeks. Run your normal routine, but maybe take the volume a little bit lower than normal. Usually I say drop volume by 15 to 20% in a down week. Maybe you need to drop it by 30 to 40% during a down week or even 50% in a down week. Keeping those days, keeping the routine, but significantly reducing volume. That's an area that is a high leverage pressure release valve because you're already taking a down week, taking a little bit more, doesn't subtract from those up weeks, but does give you that ability to balance and recover when you need it. So that's an example. During an up week, another pressure release valve would be perhaps shortening the volume on your recovery days. Maybe you're normally doing five or six miles on a recovery day or three or four miles. And instead, you decide to do four or five or one to two, or maybe jump on a bike and get some movement and blood flow that way versus doing a recovery run. So that's another area where fitness building is less important on those days. It's more about movement and blood flow that promotes healing so that you can go do the next long or hard thing. So how can you still get that movement, but do it in an even easier way so that you're then ready to go do the next hard or long thing? So recovery days, keep them, put short in the volume, change the modality, do something that creates movement with a little bit less stress. That's another pressure release valve. A third pressure release valve is pace, slowing down. Can you slow down? Absolutely. You can slow down on your recovery days. You can slow down on those easy days, the long run and the medium long run, and any other easy days during the week. Slow down the pace. There is a huge range at which we build aerobic capacity, and most of us hang out on the faster end of that range. But you've got two, three, four minutes a mile slower than that that are still within aerobic development benefit range. But we rarely hang out there. But if you do hang out there, it puts a whole lot less stress on your body and allows you to then keep it all sustainable. So play with that range a little bit. Sometimes like in the summer, you need it because it's hot. And I don't think we play enough with the slower end of the range in the summer months because you're getting more stress on your body in these hot, warm, humid conditions that you might be facing. And so crank that pressure release valve, slow the pace down. That's another area that is a pressure release valve. And I could go on, but what are your pressure release valves and how can you identify when you need to pull them and pull them so that you can get some of that stress relief, that space without compromising fitness building, or at least minimizing the impact to fitness building? So what are your pressure release valves? And then the last question here is, or the point last point here is engaging your team. We can't do this on our own. You have to have engagement from a team of people to keep this sustainable. And that starts with those closest to you, your immediate partner, your immediate family. Those that are around you every day, they're going to be supporting you whether they like it or not on the journey to your goals. You have to engage your team. And that with that group, it starts by telling them what your goals are and how you plan to accomplish them. You have to share the journey with them. I think this was a mistake I made early on in my running journey, which is that I tried to do it too much alone and I was more closed about what my goals were and how I planned to accomplish them with my then girlfriend, now wife, Amy. And so I learned actually with the advice of a mentor back in my early career days to open up more to her about what my goals were, share with her more explicitly about how I needed her to support me in those goals so that together we could be a team in achieving them because she wants me to get what I want. I want her to get what she wants in life. And when we started opening up more and sharing those things, then it unlocked an ability for me to get them in a way that I hadn't before. So engage that close family member, that partner, whoever you might be living with on the goals, tell them what you want, enlist their support, talk about balance with them too to the extent that it matters and how you're going to support them in return or make trade-offs in return to help support the unit that might be your immediate living situation. So that's one team that's important. Another team is those that might run with you, those that are supporting you when you run, and if you don't have that group, then I would encourage you to go find them. Find a running group, find a training group, find a coach who can help you. Find those around you that can hold you accountable to the work, because running is only a solo sport if you let it be. And I promise you it's much easier when you have people helping you, supporting you, showing up and expecting you to be there and calling you if you aren't on some of those easy runs during the week. It's been an absolute game changer in my life with Rogue and those that I see and coach through Rogue. But even if you don't have a Rogue in your space, I promise you there's people that you can find that will fill that role for you. So find and engage your team. It's an absolutely critical step in all of this. You can't do it alone. So that's number five. Quickly recap again, routine, routine, routine. Be creative with it as point one here. Two, something is better than nothing versus all or nothing. It's going to be absolutely critical. If you can do 90 to 95% of the work overall, then that's going to get you there. Three, periodize the work both physically and mentally to give you that balance that helps keep it all together. Four, know your pressure release valves. When you get that added stress in life, what are you going to pull to make it sustainable without compromising fitness that much? And then five, of course, engage your team. And if you need a team, find them to help you get that accountability to get it done. This is so much more fulfilling, so much more fun, and you can push yourself so much harder when you have a team around you supporting you, cheering you on, pushing you at times, but making it all the more fun and engaging. Okay, before I get to the second half of the discussion on balancing performance and health, I wanted to talk about my sponsor for this episode, Run Johngee, Johngee Running Apparel. They've got beautiful and functional running apparel from shorts that you need to run fast and move freely to all the tops from singlets and short sleeves to long sleeves and outerwear that you need to stay warm or cold or survive the heat or whatever conditions you might be facing. Really love their stuff. Been wearing it for over a year now. With this episode, I'm going to recommend that you go to their website and actually sign up for their email list. They don't send that many emails, but I get them periodically. And I always actually like checking out their emails because they'll send edits of different product categories that I maybe hadn't thought about or wasn't familiar with that will give you an assortment of gear to go check out. Or they send you great deals periodically that I'm always wanting to jump on. And then obviously you'll also get to know when they release new designs because all of their designs are supporting and telling the stories of cultures all around the world, and they're always quite beautiful. So you're the first to know if you're on their email list when a new design has been released. So go get on their email list and then go to their website and buy something using the code Rogue, R-O-G-U-E, for 10% off your first order, your 15th order. That'll work no matter when you order. Again, that's Rogue, R-O-G-U-E, for 10% off. All caps. Run johng.com. Go check it out. Okay, let's get to the second half of this discussion. We're going to be talking about balancing performance and health. Here we go. The other side of this equation, which is how do I balance performance, finding the edge and health? And this one was brought to me by listener Logan. Really appreciated his email where he shared a story where he ended up in the back of an ambulance in a race and got a lot more than he bargained for as a result. And so he has himself asking that question, you know, what's the balance between finding the edge in a race with performance and long-term health and sustainability? And I get it. I haven't had that happen to me personally, but I have had three or four athletes that I coach end up in the back of ambulances during races. And believe me, that's a scary, scary thing. All of them fortunately were okay and went on to train and still do great things beyond it. So it was just a small blip in the road. But man, it is a scary one. So we're going to talk a little bit now about balancing performance and health. And this one is an interesting one. And as Logan pointed out in his email, there is a subculture now of those that might be David Goggins' acolytes, for example, that are all about pushing the limits and finding the edge and doing big epic things and posting about it on social media. And I got to tell you, that's just not something that I personally engage a lot with or relate to. And that's for a couple reasons. One, because I think there's some toxic masculinity for lack of a better phrase tied up in a lot of that, some ego tied up in a lot of that, some pain and trauma that could perhaps be better dealt with in a therapist's office than by doing insane physical feats. That being said, I love the idea of pushing your limits and testing yourself, but I like to do it much more in the context of doing things that you're trained for, that you're prepared for, that are incremental to your current limits so that we keep it in a nice safe and measured zone versus just doing arbitrary nutso things that look good on social media, but that might actually be harmful physically in the end. And people might not appreciate those thoughts on this. And believe me, I think the thing about David Goggins that I like is that he does connect with some people, get them moving, get them pushing beyond maybe the status quo for them, which I do think is an important pursuit for all of us is testing, pushing the status quo, but I do think there should be boundaries to it, and some of it has gotten a little bit crazy and ridiculous out there. And so I'm just advocating for a measured approach to testing and pushing your limits versus one that seems sometimes to be blindly driven by ego and perhaps some desire to get attention or to sell things or to go viral or whatever it may be. So I generally steer clear of that type of self promotion, but I do believe there's a huge value at questioning the status quo, at striving for goals, testing and pressing your limits, finding your ability to go beyond what you previously thought possible. I just like to advocate doing it in a balanced, healthy way. And so this is where this question of how do I balance performance and finding the edge and being healthy for the long term, I like to think that if you approach it that way, if you approach it with a long term view, which gets to my first point on this topic, you have to approach it with a long term view. And if you're not in a rush and if you approach it with a long term view, actually think that finding performance and your edge in performance can gel and coexist with having a healthy long term approach to living. And maybe that's naïve, but I think it's possible, especially if you're coupling that with the right training principles and the right long term approach that goes with training in the right ways. So point one here is that I think you have to not rush it and you have to take a long term view. And that long term view should be independent of age and other milestones, other milestones in life. You know, I've been doing this for, I've been running for 24 years. I've been coaching for almost 20, 44 years old. I still believe that I have potential ahead of me. One thing that I'm playing with right now in my journey post Houston is really trying to optimize the sleep side of the equation, which I'd honestly sacrificed in a way that wasn't productive and healthy, but that was perhaps necessary for the phase of life that I was in. And now I'm in a different phase and I'm playing with my sleep routine to get more than six and a half hours or seven hours of sleep a night so that I can not only use sleep to feed my performance, but also to use sleep to feed longevity. And so I've created this little window of time where right now I'm optimizing around lifestyle, around sleep, and certainly I'm running, but it's lower volume right now than normal. I've amped up my strength routine as well to build strength in a way during this little window of time where I'm focused more on sleep and lifestyle balance. And I'm suboptimizing a piece of the equation knowing that I'm sacrificing on running performance in the near term because I believe that it will help me as I figure it all out and put it all back together, it will help me get after those goals that I still have very much, which is still to PR in the marathon and chase that sub 240 goal. And there are people that would say, but Chris, you're 44, you have to go faster, you're running out of time, the Grim Reaper is coming for your speed, or there are people that are operating that way or thinking that way in their current life, and I would just tell you that you have to stop thinking that way. You have to stop thinking that somehow age is coming for your speed because it's not useful, it doesn't serve you. And by the way, I've seen a lot of people aging and still getting faster well into their 50s, 60s, sometimes even 70 years old because they're still being smart about their training. So you just never know, and yes, age does slow us at some point, but you just never know when that point is and you can't train like it's tomorrow. You have to train like it's five years from now, it's ten years from now because optimizing around a long-term view, I still very thoroughly believe is the best way to reach your full potential versus taking shortcuts, versus doing things too fast too soon, which are only going to risk injury, burnout, potentially limiting your long-term potential because you're going too fast, you're rushing it. So take a long-term view to me is number one, and if you can do that, then you're going to go a long way to getting their balance right between performance and health. Two, the second point here gets back to the point I just made around keeping fundamental training principles in mind, which is that you have to polarize the work. You have to polarize the work, which is run easy, run more, recover appropriately with active recovery runs, and then very occasionally do the hard work, which in my training for most people looks like one speed workout a week. And most of those speed workouts, by the way, are rigorous but measured. And only once in a while, to use to borrow Steve Magnus' line, only once in a while we go see God, which means only once in a while we push things to the absolute limit. And that's very, very rare. But most of the time, you're staying away from those limits in training. And so if you're polarizing appropriately, you're going super easy on your easy days. Yes, you're doing plenty of volume, but you're doing it at easy conversational efforts most of the time and even easier on recovery days. And then you're only doing speed once a week, but that speed is measured and dialed in to build the right parts of the aerobic zone at the right time, which means, by the way, if you're doing that appropriately for a distance runner, that you're very rarely going to the absolute limit and you're mostly finishing workouts feeling like you could do more. All of that work, all of those philosophies and principles built around this idea of polarizing your training is key to not only reaching your max potential, but also doing it in a sustainable way that will continue to build on itself as you age. So polarizing, absolutely key. In fact, I have a whole episode on is your training polarized enough, and I would encourage you to go check that out. That's episode 291 if you haven't already listened to it or I think that's a good one to go back to if it's been a minute. So make sure your work is polarizing. Your easy run should be so, so easy. Your work should be specific and targeted to the paces that matter and count. And one example of this, by the way, especially in the summer heat, as I think about it now, it's really hard to run in Austin right now, but there will be times when you get out there and you're like, oh man, it's just brutal today. It's really humid. For example, yesterday, Thursday morning's run this week was just absolutely brutally humid and warm. We'd had rain all night, woke up. It wasn't raining, but it was humid as a result. And it was just so, so thick. You're sweating right away. And you get out there, and the natural thing for us to do is to try to just hold the pace that we normally hold because we get into that groove. But on days like that, you just can't. You just can't. So you got to slow way down and maybe on occasion walk up a hill. On those days, it's not about style points. It's about covering the distance and doing it at easy conversational efforts. And if that means slowing down or walking here and there up a hill to keep the heart rate in check, then do it. Don't be in a hurry. Focus on covering the distance and doing it at easy efforts so that you finish not feeling like you buried yourself because it was hot, but you finish feeling like, man, that wasn't ideal because it was hot, but I still felt okay, and I still finished feeling fine because I appropriately modulated the work. So modulate the work. Three, the other point here is you have to choose your battles very carefully. You have to choose your battles very carefully. And what I mean by that gets back to the point that Magnus talks about in his training philosophy, which is that you should only very occasionally see God. And so embedded in this point is this idea that you should only peak a few times a year, first of all. So you don't want to be racing hard all the time. I'm okay with doing races, but only peaking two or three times a year with two or three A races a year, you're only putting that strong emphasis where you're willing to go to the well as deep as possible on a few races a year. I don't think we can do that all the time in a sustainable way. So you have to pick your battles by being choosy about how many A races you might be racing. You have to choose your battles by picking the workouts that you're going to emphasize and maybe go to the well on. And I would submit that in general, the only workouts that you should really be even remotely thinking about going to the well on are the ones in a race-specific phase of training. So we're only talking about those 12 weeks I talked about earlier in the episode where you might be in a race-specific phase, gearing up towards a peak, and you're in those final handful of really rigorous race-specific workouts where it's time to find the edge. And you want to be careful about not falling over, but those are the times when you want to go for it and when you want to, in general, press when you're not sure and try to get a little bit more. So picking your battles and training, absolutely key to longevity. Another thing is picking your battles related to whatever conditions you might be facing. So there may be some situations where you're showing up to a target race or an A race, and for whatever reason, things aren't ideal. Maybe you're facing the limits of injury. Maybe you've got a little thing that's popped up that's spiraling a little bit, and you're not really sure if you're going to be able to race. Maybe you're sick going into a race, and you're trying to manage that as best you can. Maybe you've had a lot of work stress. Maybe the weather on race day is going to be extreme, and you're not sure if you're prepared for that. In some of those situations, the answer is going to be, hey, let's go for it anyway, because maybe in those situations, there's little risk for long-term damage. Or you decide to go for it, but give yourself some outs. It's like, okay, I'm going to do this. I'm going to go for it. But if something's not right at a given point in the race, I'm going to make a decision. And so sometimes I've had athletes put stage gates within a race to say, all right, I'm going to get to mile five in a half marathon or mile three, and I'm going to check in on myself and ask myself, how is that thing doing? That injury, how am I feeling? Whatever it may be. And if at that point it's not right, I'll pull the plug. But if I commit and I go for it, I'm staying in and I'm going all the way to the finish. Or maybe you decide not to tow the line in a race because something just isn't right. And that's okay. It's okay to step away from something if you don't feel like it's going to be right for you, if it's going to cause you to go too close to the edge. Or maybe the conditions are extreme and you're not prepared for a 75-degree day. And that's okay. It's okay to step away to DNS, as they say. Do not start. And it's okay, on occasion, to DNF as well. I think, in many ways, I think fondly on the one DNF I had in a marathon. This would have been back in 2005, Twin Cities Marathon, a DNF that about mile 18, walked off the course, saw my wife there. She was supposed to be cheering for me. And I just walked right off the course and said, hey, let's go. We're getting in the car. And I was done. And in that situation, I had a really heavy work stress situation going into that race where I was working heavily, not getting a lot of sleep in those final taper weeks. And so I went in completely depleted. And I thought, well, I'm going to give it a shot anyway, see how I feel, see how it goes. And I made it to about mile 15. And then the wheels more or less came off. I feel like Obi-Wan Kenobi when he powered down the Death Star in Star Wars where it just went like that. And that's how I felt like in that moment that the body was just powering down. I went from running in that race, low sixes to running nine minute miles and a couple of miles, and knew that my body just didn't have it on the day, and it was going to be better to walk off. I walked off, never looked back, haven't quit another race since then, but I can tell you that was absolutely the right call in that day. I chose to live to fight another day on that day. And I think sometimes that's something you have to be aware of is just choosing your battles. And if you need to DNS or DNF, that's absolutely okay. Live to fight another day. Preserve your long-term health. Number fourth in this point is this idea that I want you to be trained and ready and not have to overreach with any effort. You know, from my perspective, and this is the way I treat coaching, this is the way I treat my own training and my own goal setting, I believe that your steps forward, your testing and pressing of limits should be done in a very measured and controlled way to do it safely and also to preserve that ability to get long-term potential. I don't believe in doing things that you're not prepared for. You know, I think back to when I did the 50-mile ultra back in 2019 in Squamish, 50-mile ultra, 10,000 feet of gain, 10,000 feet of descent, pretty rigorous race. And I knew, and I'd never done a 50-miler, I had not even done 50Ks by that point, I'd done marathons. And I knew it was going to be really hard. I knew it was going to be a step up. I knew it was going to test and press beyond the limits I knew at the time. So what did I do? I studied the course. I built training specifically designed to prepare me for the rigors of the elevation change on that course. I was doing long time-based trail efforts to make sure that I could get out there and spend the time on my feet I needed. I was researching and then testing out nutrition and hydration elements from trail running that I never really had to experiment with or play with over the course of a 12-hour effort versus a 3- or 4-hour effort. And so I did everything I could to prepare for that event. That was absolutely about pressing and testing my limits, but it was not beyond what I was capable of. I just needed to be prepared and trained for it. And that's what I did, and I did the race. And while it was very hard and very challenging, and I'm very proud of the effort, it was infinitely doable because of my preparation. And so I believe in that kind of pressing and testing of limits, which is do it incrementally and do it in ways that you're absolutely prepared for because you can train and you can make sure the body and mind are ready. And don't twist what I'm saying here because some people might listen to what I just said and say, well, you're telling me that if it comes to time goals in a marathon or half marathon, I should be incremental in those, you know? And that's not necessarily true. Maybe it's true for you, maybe it's not. Maybe you're able to make bigger jumps because of the process and preparation that allows you to do it. This is more about matching preparation to the measured way at which you test and press your limits. And if you can keep those in sync, then you're going to take a lot fewer risks, and you're going to balance performance and health in a way that I think is more sustainable than if you do something that's just completely outside the realm of your training at any point. I think that's when things start to get dangerous. And number five, I would say, be prepared for your conditions and set and know your limits on a given day. And look, this is not me throwing stones by any stretch at anybody who has gone beyond or has perhaps ended up in the back of an ambulance in a race, because look, that stuff happens, and there are times when things spiral out of your control, because I hate that that happens to people, and there are real risks at what we're doing that sometimes end up putting us in places that we didn't plan for or didn't expect. And oftentimes, there's nothing you could have done about it in some of those situations. Certainly, a lot of people ended up in the med tent at Boston this year who wouldn't want to be there, hadn't planned to be there because of the warm conditions. And I think oftentimes this stuff is associated with warm conditions. But the cautionary tale related to all of that is just, okay, if I see challenging conditions coming, how can I prepare to the extreme for those challenging conditions? And when it comes to heat, as we're dealing with right now with the summer, making sure that you're wearing as little clothing as possible, that your electrolyte balance, that your water intake is all right, and that you've tested and worked on those things in advance so that you know exactly how to amp them up when the conditions do get warmer. And then, of course, appropriately, that you're backing off your pace in those situations because we can't just blindly follow the same paces when we have warm conditions. This also looks like potentially having the right gear when it comes to layers in cold conditions, so that we're not too cold or we're not risking hypothermic situations in the other extreme, like some people may have faced in the 2018 Boston. And so the last point here is just prepare to the extreme when you're facing extreme conditions. Be prepared for anything, and then put in place the measures to adjust accordingly when those conditions pop up. Amping up electrolytes, amping up hydration, amping up the layers, knowing what you need to be doing and wearing in all those various situations. This all falls under the category of controlling the things you can control when extreme situations pop up. Being as prepared as you can be, and then putting in place those measures and those preparations when the time is right. And then relatedly, even if you're doing that, still know the boundaries that you should be careful of so that you can raise a flag further and perhaps stop or slow down if things start to spiral a little bit. Think about heat being one example. You know, we can see and feel the cues of heat exhaustion coming on, for example, where, you know, you might have... Your stomach might get upset. You might have nausea. You're going to start to maybe feel a little bit of dizziness. You're going to potentially stop sweating or start to feel cold a little bit, even if the conditions are warm. When heat exhaustion symptoms start kicking in, maybe you're going to not be able to run in a straight path in some of those situations. So you're going to know also the warning signs of heat as one example or of perhaps other things that might be spiraling out of control. What are those warning signs? And so how can you set limits around those warning signs that cause you to either slow down, pull back, or perhaps step off the course if you need to? You can think about one of the athletes that I coached started to have some of those symptoms in this year's Boston, and she appropriately was able to back off and still get it done in a much slower time than she wanted to, but was able to protect her health by being responsive to the cues that she was getting that some of those heat exhaustion symptoms were kicking in. And look, we can't always know and prepare. Sometimes things kick in really quickly. Sometimes we're still going to end up in the med tent or end up in an extreme situation. But that doesn't mean we shouldn't prepare. We shouldn't think about what conditions might cause us to adjust, what our adjustments and our limits might be when those things pop up so that we can be as prepared as possible and prevent those things that might threaten our long-term health. And I believe it takes as much courage to put those things in place and to know when to back off and when to pull away as it does take courage to push beyond anyway. So I don't want anybody to think that this would show a sign of weakness to be doing this. I think it's actually a sign of strength and courage to have these measures in place to balance health and performance appropriately. So those are the five things. Number one, have that long term view. Number two, make sure your training is polarized and you're following those appropriate principles for long term health, which by the way will also help you with longevity. Number three, choose your battles very carefully and wisely. We can't go fighting all the time. We can only go see God periodically. Number four, be trained and ready and don't overreach with your efforts. Be measured. Number five, be prepared for the conditions and know your limits and how you're going to adjust when things get challenging or when those red flags start to pop up. So those are the points I would mention around performance and health. But all of this stuff is tricky. And so I'll just wrap this to say, you know, we're all learning. I have an episode on using your running intuition. And I think a lot of what this episode requires is a constant ability to learn and to adjust and to figure out where that balance is, that yin and yang. And the moment we think we've got it figured out, something will change and we'll have to rebalance. And so this is a lifelong pursuit of understanding your limits and finding balance so that you can be not only happy and healthy, but also perform. But I think it's a worthy pursuit. And I do think it's one, if you commit to it, that you can get better at without sacrificing the big goals and the long-term dreams. And so that's my hope for me, and that's my hope for all of you, is that you can find that balance and keep finding it over time. So with that, I'll wrap this episode. Thanks to John G for sponsoring. Thanks to all of you for listening. As always, you can check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Twitter, Instagram, or Facebook at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon. See you soon.