Hey everybody, welcome to episode 403 of the Running Rogue Podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung, here with co-host James Dodds. Excited about this episode, because we're talking about one of the most important runs that you do every single week, or maybe close to every single week. We're talking about the long run, the long run, the ever important long run, perhaps the most important run in the plan for our distance athletes. We're going to break it all down. The why we do it, the how long, the frequency, the speed of them. We're going to talk about all those little details and remind you about how to most effectively use your long runs. So excited about that, but quick check in. How we doing?

Doing well. Got in a run, rain cooled things off. It's going to be warm and humid tonight, but I got it in before the day's too rough.

The storms were a blessing in this case. Sometimes it makes it more humid this time. It kind of pushed some of that humidity past us, which was nice. So, yeah, amazing. So let's dig in on the long run, sir. You know, one of my favorite quotes about the long run. We actually use it at the end of the chapter, Chapter 17. If you're following along in the book, is the long run puts the tiger in the cat, which is a quote from the great coach Bill Squires, who coached a lot of people up in the Boston area, two fast times at the Boston Marathon. But yeah, we're putting some tigers in the cat with the long run. What do you, if you were to break down that quote, how would you break it down?

I think he, I would look at it through the lens of like that, like shrink that ability to believe, you know how to go get what you want. Cause a tiger is a powerful cat, not just any cat, right? So he's differentiating between the common cat and the, I'm trying to say away from the word aggressive, but you take a tiger quite seriously, right? So if you want to be taken serious, if you want to be able to take your running serious, you want to take your race goals serious, you want to feel like a big powerful cat, i.e. a tiger, not just the kitten that purrs.

You know, and the tiger is also one of the apex predators, you know, of the world. So in that sense, it also puts that predatorial kind of instinct in you to go get what you want. So that's another way to look at it. But yeah, it makes you strong, makes you hard to beat, and makes you tough and dangerous, you know, if you have that consistent long run. But I think the paradox of it is that the long run should not be something that you're hammering every week. And we'll talk about that as we get into it. There's a lot of nuance in terms of how to execute the long run the right way in order to get that tiger to come out. So let's dig into it. We're gonna start with the why of the long run, kind of three main reasons why we do the long run. I'm sure there's others you could list, but the three most important are, A, the long run helps you build aerobic capacity, just like all of those longer, or all the putting in the miles helps do for us. It builds that aerobic capacity, that internal ability to take oxygen from the air and send it to our working muscles to make them go. And we're gonna break these down each in turn. It helps us build neuromuscular resilience for those longer races, so that the muscles have staying power when things get tired. And it also helps you build fueling adaptation to make you an efficient fuel burner. And in many cases, help you burn fat efficiently and to cross between that carbon fat burning threshold without bonking and to burn a mix of those fuels in a way that's most optimal. So those are the three main reasons why we do the long run. Let's talk about those in turn. Aerobic capacity. What would you say about the long run's ability to build aerobic capacity?

Well, I think of it in this sense, in this context, as kind of like cook times, like how long your quote in the proverbial 11. And I don't want to get too lost in a metaphor, but it's just, it's for the same benefits that we've talked about quite a lot in past discussions on why we run easy, et cetera. But obviously, it's helping the ability to take oxygen out of the air into the lungs and get it to the working muscles. And so we apply that to pay spread out across multiple runs in the week. But it's the long run specifically that we push it on the endurance end. We're trying to push past certain little governors and allow your body to get used to going longer and longer and longer. So it's the, that's why we put so much emphasis on it and treat it with so much respect and why it has so much impact. Because we need one of those runs per week to focus on almost maximizing time. I'm trying to stay away from words like maximize because there has to be a build with long runs, just like there has to be a build with anything else.

Yeah, I mean, it's that internal remodeling that I remind people of. And we talk about this generally with mileage in general, with that consistent volume. Long runs a big component of it. But remodeling our insides in a way that helps us take more oxygen and get it to our working muscles. And what does that mean? That means bigger lung capacity or larger lungs. That means more efficient lungs in passing oxygen from those cellular membranes into the bloodstream. It means more red blood cells to carry oxygen in your bloodstream. It means those red blood cells are more efficient at passing oxygen into the working muscles. It means more blood vessels, like literally building capillary beds into your working muscles to extend the reach of the bloodstream. And then obviously more mitochondria, more efficient mitochondria when you actually get into that cellular engine. So all of that remodeling happens when you're building volume, and in particular when you're doing those long runs consistently. And then you have a bigger engine to make yourself go. To use a car analogy which we sometimes use, it means more cylinders in the engine versus a really revved up small engine. And it all happens, not all of it, but a big portion of that happens in the long run. I think the other thing to point out here relative to building aerobic capacity is that as the runs extend, there's a non-linear benefit to those runs. So when we start to get beyond those shorter runs, those later miles of medium long runs and long runs have more aerobic capacity building benefit than the early miles. Because the body gets into that mode of remodeling itself after that initial kind of warm up or entry period. And so those later miles of those longer runs are in particular, especially if you've built to them gradually, those are in particular are particularly more beneficial at building aerobic capacity than the opening miles. And so that's another key benefit of the long run, is that rich aerobic capacity building time on feet once you extend those runs. So that's aerobic capacity. Second benefit, neuromuscular resilience. Basically improving the communication between the nervous system and the muscular system so that it doesn't shut it down. You know, the nervous system is... On one hand, it's the communication mechanism of the body. On the other hand, it's a warning system. It's something that will keep you away from danger or signal to the systems in your body that you need to flee or attack or whatever it may be. That fight or flight mechanism is triggered by the nervous system. And one of the ways that a flight or fight mechanism manifests in running is cramping. You know, commonly people talk about getting cramps. Well, my leg cramp, I couldn't go. That is a way of the body saying, no more. We're shutting you down. And as we're learning about the science of cramping, it's typically some combination of neuromuscular fatigue and electrolyte imbalance, and those things can work together to cause cramps. You know, historically, we've thought of cramping just as an electrolyte issue, and we know now that it's not really just that. It's actually a neuromuscular signal to say, hey, we're tired, things are going too far, stop. And so what we're doing when we're gradually extending the long run is basically saying, hey, nervous system is safe to go longer, and it's safe to go longer and sometimes harder, so that when you get into a race, you're more resilient neuromuscularly. And so that the body doesn't freak out on you. It's so that you push away those error messages, so to speak. And so doing consistent long runs, and typically longer than you might think long runs, we'll talk about distances in a second, it's going to help you build that resilience so that those things don't happen. Those haywire communications don't happen. What did I miss there, anything?

You didn't miss anything. I thought it was really good, especially from the technical standpoint. And so it just started making me think of like metaphors. And you hit on this, but it's like, we don't, those little governors, we don't want to come in and just break them. And like, that's why single session jumps are often one of the biggest risks for injury. So it's, we're not, we're not advocating that we just come and just like completely break those governors. That's good. But like you said, we're bumping against them and we're stretching them. And I just so happened to be making pizza this weekend and using the roller. And I had some dough that didn't work well with me. And I'm thinking of your language of extending your, your comfort zone, like expanding. And I think that's the trick here. It's like, yes, we want to push against those governors and extend them. But I was thinking of the pizza dough because every time to turn it, I was making progress, but it's like I had to keep circling around and just barely stretching out until, you know, through the course of about 15, 20 minutes. I had the dough at the width that I wanted. And I just felt like that was a good metaphor for like, you know, you get too aggressive and you rip the dough in half. And same with your internal governors. You get mean and aggressive and work against yourself. Well, then you just break them. But if you take that sort of like, hey, I'm trying to keep it all together and just constantly extend it, that's the approach to it. And I got a little off in the metaphor, but that's what came to mind as you spoke.

It's that progressive overload, right? Just gradually making steps to extend the comfort zone of the body. So, neuromuscular resilience, second big benefit of long runs. Third is fueling adaptation. We have to teach the body to burn its fuel efficiently, both carbs, glycogen, and fat. And a lot of what we're doing with especially easy long runs is building that fat adaptation component, because our fat stores typically, no matter how lean you are, will have enough fuel to carry you through a marathon. And obviously, when you're going harder in a marathon, you're using more carbs than fat, but you need to use both, and you need to use both efficiently, and long runs are helping us with that fueling adaptation. We'll talk obviously too about fueling on long runs, because as we know and as we've learned, getting in the right amount of carbs is an important part of the process for both long runs and races, but ultimately, we're learning to use the fuel in our system efficiently, and then supplementing that with fueling from the outside. So third benefit of the long run is fueling adaptation, which by the way also has just a general metabolic adaptation benefit outside of running too, which I don't think we often think about, is that when we're doing these long easy runs, we're building metabolic flexibility, so that when we're just hanging out working on a given day, maybe we didn't eat when we should, our body can flexibly go into fat burning mode, so that you can sustain yourself during a day. And when you're efficient metabolically on the run, that also makes you efficient metabolically outside of running. So there's also a side metabolic benefit that extends beyond if you're doing these things the right way. So anyway, that's the long run. Important, those are three important things when it comes to doing well in a full marathon, a half marathon, really any endurance sport is you want to have high aerobic capacity, strong neuromuscular resilience, and flexible ability to switch fuels. If you can do that, you're in a good spot. So the question then is, or the questions that follow are a series that, we've got six questions that follow on the mechanics and the tactics of the long run. The first being, how long? How long should my long run be? What would you say in answering that question? I know it's a broad one, so chop it down however you may.

Well, there's one where it's like, if someone's brand new and starting out, it's just the longest that you can go that week because we're going to start building from there. But that might leave it way too vague, so I just want to get really closer to it. Even with what you talked about to end the first portion and you were talking about the metabolic benefits that extend outside of running, it's like we have 90 minutes to two hours of glycogen or stored sugar basically that we can quickly access. And so for me, just very early on, getting into coaching and programming, I knew that I considered a long run really, and this isn't about hierarchies and comparative measures, but just from the scientific side, or like when you have your long run regularly established in that 90 minute to two hour window where you're teaching your body that we can deplete what we have stored up and it doesn't need to freak out. And like you said, we can pull from fat as well. And so we're metabolically flexible. That 90 minute to two hour mark is quote the, I'd say the benchmark or standard for like, that's a long run. And then it becomes even a more extended conversation where it's like, you're going beyond that for producing the best results in a marathon, et cetera. But that's a good starting anchor, is that 90 minute to two hour window.

Yeah, one way I like to answer this question is longer than you think. Because I do think, especially those that are newer to the sport, they think long run and they think building to a certain distance. And they may have a number that they've heard in their head. It's like, well, for marathons, we build a 20 miles or for half marathons, we build a 12 or 14. People have these sort of benchmarks in their head. And I think they often think about them in the context of the race they might be training for and that that only really happens in a certain window training for those races. And so one thing I would like to emphasize here is that if you're serious about your performance, then the long run is something that is happening all the time. It never goes away in a sense. And yes, it ebbs and flows depending on what training period you're in and what you're training for specifically, but it's something that you kind of do week in and week out year round outside of recovery and taper periods. And even in those periods, you're still doing it at some level, but it's scaled accordingly. And so the long run is something that's just a week in and week out thing that then, as you said, gets customized depending on what you might specifically be training for. And in general, that's going to be longer than you think. So personally, I believe that everybody should get to a point, regardless of whether they're training for something specifically or not, where they can go out and do a two hour long run every week, again, outside of the context of training for something specific, and just be able to do that, no problem. Because that's a fundamental building block to then be able to ramp up or scale to any distance you want. Plus, it's also a fundamental building block to longevity. It's having that easy, long aerobic stimulus once a week, at least once a week. So that's kind of one way to answer this. And then you alluded to the other way to answer this, which is, okay, when I have a specific race, what does that look like? And we're commonly on record with the marathon to say, we want to get you to at least 20 miles, four to six times before you go race a marathon. And I think a lot of programs that you might see out there build you to two or three 20 mile plus runs, but we're big on getting you to four to six. And you may not start there in your first marathon, but ultimately once you have at least two in the, or you're going for at least your second, we're gonna say, hey, let's get to four to six. And as you get more advanced, you might even extend beyond six 20 mile runs. Because when you can bang out a 20 mile run and have it go smoothly and make that feel comfortable in air quotes, then you've reached a next level of fitness and you definitely will have a next level of staying power in the marathon itself. And then for the half, we like to get people up to an experience happening that are up to 14 to 16 miles. Because that over distance in the half becomes really important. And we would even say if you're training for a 5K or 10K, we might get you up to 14 to 16 miles. Some of the best milers in the world will be doing 18-mile long runs almost every week. So that over distance, that long run is still important for even shorter distance races. Now, you don't go there overnight. You got to build there gradually. You got to build there as you build more experience. But that should be what you're shooting for over time. What else would you add there?

Not a lot to add there on the how long. So I was just thinking of like if someone was confused as to why would a miler or these pros, like why would they still be doing 18-mile? It just, again, back to the body needing stimulus, et cetera, like they're so far into their development that they're fully bought into your statement of longer than you think. And they just recognize that like without trying to wreck or hurt their body, they do need to feed that beast, that machine. Like now that they are a big cat, they need to keep feeding that big cat to keep that power and endurance.

Yeah, the standard power. I mean, that's the thing people often talk about. You know, on the shorter races, and if they're watching elite, they talk about elites that have kicks, quote kicks. And they think about that person who can crush the last lap of a mile, or crush the last two laps of a 5k, or finish strong in the last 1k of a 10,000. Those are fast athletes, but they're also really strong athletes. And they're building that strength from miles and from longer runs. That gives them the staying power to tap into those natural speeds late in the race, when things are getting tired and it starts to ramp up. And us everyday athletes can benefit from that same concept. And one thing I think it's important to comment on here is, people may be like, well, that's unreasonable. I'm not going to do a two hour run every week. And that's OK if you don't want to. But do recognize that if you're prioritizing performance or have certain goals, that it might be a part of the equation that you need to figure out. And some people might say, well, I don't have time for that. I would say, well, then make time. I do think that if you get or you're able to do what you prioritize and if you want to prioritize running performance and if you want to prioritize longevity through something like a weekly longer run, then you'll make time and you'll figure it out. And then it becomes a part of your routine. I remember early on in our marriage having a conversation with my wife, who also was a marathoner at the time. And she's like, are we going to be doing the long runs every Saturday for the rest of our lives? And she wasn't saying that in a critical way. It was more just like an out loud sort of, wait a minute, is this what we're signing up for?

That's her brain accepting, oh, this is my future.

And the answer, and I was like, yeah, I think we are. And of course, we've had ebbs and flows, and there's been seasons of life with young kids where that wasn't happening necessarily. But yeah, we just kind of accepted it, and now our life has built around that Saturday morning routine where we're doing a longer run for me, and now a longer workout for her. She does more functional fitness stuff now. But anyway, but yeah, we just prioritize it to the point where when our kids were young, we wouldn't get babysitters for date nights, we would get babysitters for Saturday morning. So we can go get our run and workout in, have breakfast together, and then go be parents. So anyway, so there's a little bit of maybe having to look yourself in the mirror and say, what matters to me and how do I need to change my lifestyle and my routine to fit this in, in a sustainable way? So first question, how long kind of answered that? Second question is how many? And I had a short answer on how long, longer than you think I have a short answer on how many, which is every single week in some form or another, right? Every single week in some form or another. And that obviously there's caveats to that. If you're on vacation or you're in a recovery period, post-marathon, you're not necessarily doing a marathon every single week, but outside of that, outside of those exceptions every single week. And it might have been flow with the ups and the down weeks, as we on our schedule have two up weeks and then a third down week, where you're still doing a long run, but it's a shorter long run. But basically, you're doing it every single week. And that's answering the question on the macro level. And then we can start to answer the question on the micro level as it relates to specific races. But any comments on the macro point first?

No, I like that. Obviously, it's weekly and then, of course, because we've talked about building programs in the past, we know that every third week we have a down week. And I think you were alluding to that when you said there will be some that aren't as long. But that's where I like using the duration perspective or the time, because if you slowly and humbly climb, doesn't matter where they start from, you slowly climb up to reaching that two hour mark, then it's a really nice baseline anchor to where it's like down weeks are 90 minutes plus, and then up weeks are two hours plus, and then that will convert over to distances for people. And that's not even from the performance angle yet. That's sort of like, hey, baseline, because we could make that case in the spirit of moving towards better performance. And I just, I guess this is part of our theme today because it's staying in my head and it's, I'm glad you brought up the tertiary benefits, like the other lifestyle benefits of having this, utilizing the long run. Because if you're even kind of drawn towards the sport and not every season that you're in it, are you focused on a PR, you're still gonna want a long run for these just straight up longevity and lifestyle benefits that you've kind of hinted at while we're trying to also stay on the performance track. I mean, this is a hard one. Like when I, in my worst attitude kind of days, I'm like, buddy, we can't, you can't negotiate yourself out of the idea that it would be best for me, not like I must, but like from a healthy, holistic perspective, the best me is gonna need, not because I love the sport or anything like that, just plain and simple, what the human body needs, that 90 minute to two hour regular once a week, it pays dividends.

Yeah. Yeah, and if you're newer to the sport, you might be thinking, well, that sounds like a lot. It's like, okay, well then what's your target to get into this routine? It might be 8 to 10 miles. Say, hey, can I get up to a weekly 8 to 10 mile run and see how that feels? For those that are intermediate or maybe they've done a half, then it's like, okay, well, how can I get to a solid over distance long run of 14 to 16 miles? And then for the marathoners or those aspiring marathoners, it's like, all right, how do I get up to 2022 where that feels smooth and comfortable? And then as I go through various cycles of that, add more 20 milers to the equation so that I get even more benefit from that distance. And so it's all, as we often say, iterative and based on your starting point. It's not like we're telling you to go from zero to 20 miles, six 20 mile runs in a training cycle. No, it's what's your milestone? And then work there gradually and then build from there. So that's the second question, how many? Third question, how fast? And if we're going with piffy one-liners on these, how long? Longer than you think. How fast? Slower than you think. Slower than you think. And this is absolutely critical to beat into your head. You know, these long runs, it's so so important that you keep the pace manageable, conversational, so that you can sing lyrics while you're doing it. One to two minutes slower than your target marathon pace, or 90 seconds to two and a half minutes slower than your target half pace. Slower than you think. Because when you're slower than you think, you optimize both the aerobic capacity building benefits, the fueling adaptation benefits, and you give yourself the chance to build the neuromuscular resilience, so that you're not breaking yourself along the way. And so you got to slow down these long runs and really embrace that. And we'll talk later about optimizing long runs and long run workouts, which is on a part of the equation as you get more experienced. But that every week tried and true run of the mill long run is going to be nice and easy and conversational. And you should finish feeling not destroyed, but rather strong. And if you're not finishing that way, then you're going too fast.

Yep. And I'll just point out that I really love when people are doing their first marathon build or they've been off for a while and basically are back in the boat of having to rebuild. Because with that climb, I always say like, you know, like the first time someone hits 14, it was like, man, 12 is great. But those last two, I was kind of doubting myself. Like, that feeling is probably right on, you know? Like, because you're kind of re-teaching and re-stretching those limits or whatever. And so it's like, it's not until you, that until you've hit 16, that 14 starts to feel like a little bit like under your feet and so on. So it's like, there's a stretching, there's a challenge. But like you said, there's not a wrecking and breaking down and I can't function the rest of the day kind of feeling.

Yeah. And that, I mean, again, you might make mistakes and that might happen, but you shouldn't view that as a win. You should view that as a, okay, red flag, I need to go slower next time. Or red flag, I need to fuel and hydrate better next time. And so it's just absolutely critical. And this is where, you know, I get frustrated when people talk about, well, I did my long run faster than last week. And so that must be better, right? It's like, well, no, not necessarily. And I always want people to push the boundaries on slowing down for the long run, rather than push the boundaries on speeding up. And definitely, definitely, definitely don't compare yourself from week to week based on the pace of your long run. Did you get it done? Did you get it done in a conversational way? Check, check, pass, fail. We're not grading you based on how fast you went on the long run unless of course there's a workout involved, which is a different category of long run. So slow the F down on your long runs to get the full benefits, which leads us to our fourth question because, you know, perfect segue. Can I go too fast on the long run? Can I go too fast on the long run? Absolutely. The short answer is very easy on this. Absolutely. What happens when you go too fast on a long run?

You stop producing all those benefits we were talking about. Your body can no longer. It's going to switch systems and it's going to, you know, we recently talked about threshold and talked about what happens when lactate starts to accumulate in the bloodstream. Now you're flipping into different systems and your body's prioritizing something different. And so I just kind of bucket that as a catch-all. You're now in recycling mode. So not only is the answer, yes, I can go too fast, I would even go as far as putting it in language like, hey, there's a good chance on long runs you can even accidentally go too fast. Meaning you started off at an effort that felt right, but it was a little bit more humid and it was a little bit warmer than you expected. You're a little more tired. And so your heart rate's going up and your body's working harder. And now you start producing that lactate and it starts to rise. And so let's say you're even 15 seconds slower than maybe your quote average long run pace that you have in your mind. That day, you might actually be tipping into that zone and now getting into recycling mode as opposed to creation mode. So I guess where I'm going with that is I would go as far as not only can you go too fast, but you can actually accidentally tip into an arena where not necessarily causing crazy damage, but you are losing some of that aerobic benefit that we're seeking. So it's funny, most people will say, can I go too slow? And I'm like, no, you're good. Just like, that's not our worry. You could definitely accidentally go too fast. And that's just from that lactate angle. I mean, you could play it from the, like the over taxation of the central nervous system that guides it all constantly in a anxious state. The muscles themselves overworking them, push it. Like there's a bone layer, there's a muscle layer, there's a heart rate layer. I only came at it just in that one single response from the lactate angle, but I'm like, you could pick your angle and answer the same way.

You end up in the wrong aerobic zone to build aerobic capacity the way you need. And then also you can be stressing the body too much so that you break yourself. And then therefore you can't be consistent. You can't do the next long run. You interrupt your training cycle. So yeah, it's like Icarus. You can fly too close to the sun. And if you do that on long runs, then you're short circuiting all those potential benefits. You know, one of the things I think about in this particular question is, okay, well, what are signs that I'm going too fast? So how could somebody know that maybe they're going too fast? Even if, you know, initially, as you said, they start out and it feels conversational. You know, there's a handful of ways. One would be finishing feeling beat up and destroyed. You know, we already talked about that, but that's a perfect example. When you finish, you're like, oh, I'm done. I got to go sit on the couch for the rest of the day. It's like, okay, well, that's a sign that you went too fast. Another sign would be heart rate creep. You know, if you're watching that heart rate either real time or when you look at the data later, and you might generally see a slight heart rate creep, but you don't want it to be escalating relatively quickly. And those that are going too fast will see that late in the run, where that heart rate will start to exponentially increase. And that's a sign that you're going too fast. You know, you want to see maybe a slight bit of heart rate creep, especially in warmer temperatures, but it shouldn't be out of control. You know, like I think about my run last week, I was in the low 130s at the start, finished in the high 130s. Like, that's probably a reasonable creep for a heart rate on a hot day doing 16 miles. But if you were going into the 150s at the end, red flag, that's too fast. And so, you know, those are examples. Another example, or another way to know, which dovetails with the fueling, but I think is kind of an independent question or signal, which is that if you're bonking or feeling like you're depleted from a fueling standpoint, then that's a sign you're going too fast. Because you're tapping exclusively into those glycogen stores. And even if you're supplementing with it beyond, if you're bonking, then that's a sign the body's not tapping into the fat stores that you need. And so, Houston, we have a problem, you're going too fast. So those are some ways to know that will manifest in different cues. Can I go too fast? Absolutely, so don't. And look, by the way, if you make that mistake, it's fine. Like it happens, right? We're not saying you have to be perfect in all this stuff. But when it happens, recognize it, flag it, and say, all right, next time I'm going to be better. Learn from it. Don't just go out and then hammer your head against the wall the next week, like touching the hot stove twice in a row. Okay, so that's the fourth question. Can I go too fast? Abso-freaking-lutely. Fifth question today is how to fuel, how to hydrate. And this one I think is a little bit tricky to answer because it is individual. Everybody is going to find a little bit of a different set of things that work for them. But what would you say is the general baseline advice you give on fueling and hydration for long runs?

Well, hydration, I want to start with the fueling first of the hydration, like weather and everything is going to matter. But with fueling, again, I anchor it around that 90 minute mark for glycogen and then it's like, hey, I want to, so I start with an easy anchor or piece of scaffolding that people can wrap their brain around and then like you said, they can get way more personalized and dialed in for how they function. But it's like, if it's not over 90 minutes, I actually don't, I'm okay if athletes take sugar on it, but I don't prescribe it. Neither do I personally take it unless I know I'm going to be going longer than 90 minutes. And for really like well-trained athletes who've been at it for a long time, that's going to be closer to the two hour mark. Their body can just kind of home along for two hours. And as long as it's slow enough and easy enough, and it's conversational enough, they're good. So let's work with that 90 minute though. And then the thought I always had was precede the bonk with that first gel. And so I got very comfortable just recommending that if you're going past 90, let's say it's a couple hours, then I'd start at the 75 minutes and then every 30 minutes afterwards. But truly if it's right at, let's say 90 minutes, well, we also know it takes a little bit of time for you to absorb the sugar. The signal's huge because it'll tell the body and it'll help it relax just when it hits the mouth. But for it to get in your bloodstream and actually have any kind of impact, I start working backwards then. So I know if it's a two hour run, then I might take it at 60 and 90 just because that gives me two 30 minute pops to finish off the gel. Or if it's literally only 90, then fine, I'll take it at that one hour mark and that's good. But basically once you introduce exogenous fuel sources, you have to keep feeding it. So once you take that first gel every 30 minutes afterwards, that's why it becomes a little bit of a game of start with how long it's going to take you and work backwards in 30 minute chunks and make sure that first one precedes the bonk or precedes the 90 minute mark. That's my baseline recommendation.

Yeah, it's a good baseline. Start at 60, come back to it every 30 minutes after that. We used to say 35 to 40 minutes, and for some people who are a little worried about how they're going to adapt to fueling, I still tell them to start there, come back to it every 35 to 40 minutes, and then start to decrease the interval from there so that your body can adapt to what you're taking in and not get sick or not having digestive issues along the way. But as we've learned from recent science about carbs, the more carbs you can get, the better, but you have to be able to take them in and do it without getting sick along the way. And that is something that you have to individually adapt to. So keep that in mind, but that is a good baseline starting point for anybody out there. And then of course, when you're choosing what to fuel with, we like gels or choose because they're easy and they're kind of pure sugar based, but there's obviously a lot of different varieties, flavors, caffeine or no caffeine, hydro gel, different forms of it with Morton and whatnot. And so then you have to just start experimenting. And one of the things that we encourage is just that you try a bunch of different things, find the flavors and the brands that work for you and roll with it from there. But every long run you're doing where you know you're fueling on race day, you should be practicing this and experimenting with it until you dial in to what you need. And then you can just repeat that. From a hydration standpoint, I think in general, if we were to give a one-liner on the fueling and hydration question, is there's basically you need more than you think. And I think that's particularly true for hydration. You know, an average female in kind of warmer conditions will lose about 25 ounces per hour. An average male will lose about 32 ounces per hour of sweat, water through sweat. That's about, you know, two pounds of body weight, you know, if you're looking at 32 ounces. And do you have to replace all of that? You know, the rule of thumb I like to use, you want to replace about 80% of that along the way, you know, if you're doing a marathon or a half marathon. And so you're going to need to take in more than you think, you know, which if I'm going on a hot run, that's about 25 ounces per hour that I need to take in in order to stay at baseline, in addition to obviously taking in electrolytes. And so again, this is something you have to play with, but we encourage you to take in more hydration than you think, supplement that typically with electrolytes as well, particularly if you're training in warm climates so that you can stay balanced with all of it. We need electrolytes to absorb the water we're taking in, and so both things need to come together, but that is something that you have to play with as well.

And hydration's become one of those because that's in run hydration, right? And that's obviously where the conversation is and it's so important, but it's funny because as a coach, I've gotten to where I just, I don't even know it, like you can't really decouple general hydration from in run hydration. So anytime I have, at least in the private setting in one to one, and I try to say this in group settings too, as constant reminders, like, but you know, with groups, we're always circling back to different topics because people are racing at different times, but with one to one, I always start, I'm like right out of the gate. Do you, if you're in this sport, I'm like, because I would actually recommend this to family who hates running and they're never going to run. But still, if you're going to be in this sport, it's like every single day, we lose weight and sweat through the night, even for sleeping. So I encourage people to find an electrolyte that they like and get on it daily. And then of course, drink your water throughout the day. I think a lot of us culturally know like, I should drink my eight cups of water. And that's, you know, that may or may not be right for you, but either way, you know, you need a lot of water throughout the day just as a human. And you have a much better chance of holding onto that water if you're taking your electrolytes. So it's like, we wake up in a hole every day. And I encourage people just from like a flat baseline, like get on a morning electrolyte, stay on your hydration through the week, so that when you do go out for a potential two to three hour long run, you're not starting in a hole. You can still get in one in a single session run, but you don't want to start in one and then play a catch up game.

Yeah, and even if you're doing it well on the run, you're still ending with a deficit. So then post run, getting back to full hydration again is really important, especially post long run. I always tell people, you want to get back to peeing normally as quickly as possible after the long run because your body needs water to rebuild itself. So it's a part of the recovery process. If you're feeling really beat up and sluggish the day after your long runs, that might be part of the problem, is you're not rehydrating well post long run. Could also mean you're not fueling well post long run. Both of those things are going to be important. And so, yeah, but you're right. It is a, especially in the Texas summers, it's a 24 by 7 job to stay on top of it if you're running any mileage at all. But it is a personal journey, so you have to make sure you figure out what works for you individually along the way. Another note on fueling that I wanted to say outside of the long run is, yeah, you gave the formula for in-run fueling. But I also want to remind people that getting a little bit of food, taking in calories pre-long run, is also a really important step. So, I like to say 200 to 300 calories the morning of with something that's going to be easily digestible, ideally carbs and maybe a little bit of fat. You know, for me, it will be a frozen waffle that I throw in the toaster and then put a little bit of butter on. The fat helps cut the carbs a little bit, so you don't get that exaggerated insulin spike. But it's basically giving your body a signal that it's safe and okay. We got fuel, we got food, it's readily available before I go do a three-hour run. Because if you're not giving it that signal that it's safe and okay, then it can create issues where it goes into a flight or fight metabolic mode that can then cause metabolic dysfunction on the other side. And so a little bit of food before you start those long runs, adequate fueling throughout, refueling post with a good filling, macronutriently balanced meal after the long run, and hydrating back to full hydration on the other side. And that is a formula for doing the best you can to feel good the next day. But you're going to find if you short change the fueling, the hydration, then you're going to be more sluggish the next day. And yes, the long run may have been long and hard, but were you taking care of yourself around it becomes a question. So a lot to consider there with fueling and hydration, but think about it, play with it, find the right formula that works for you. But you're probably needing to do more than you think. Is the summary there. And then the last question is, what about long run workouts? When can I go faster in long runs? And how does that fit into the overall equation? And this is something that's a hallmark of our training. And I think when we're talking about putting the tiger in the cat in particular, the long run workouts is a really big component of that. We like to call them race preps or simulator runs, where you're simulating your race day experience by doing targeted pace work within the long run to prepare yourself for the circumstances you might face on race day. And I think we've talked about examples of long run workouts before, but for us, for that experience runner, we like to build people up to two or three of these work per cycle so that they're getting that opportunity to practice race pace in the context of a long run on tired legs so that they're more ready to do it on race day. So how would you describe a long run workout to our listener?

I would describe it really as anything in a long run where you're strategically adding stimulus and therefore changing out of that glacially slow, relaxed, easy, long run pace that we covered a few bullet points ago. I'd say that that's general enough to be somewhat of a catch all for all of them. But yeah, it's when you're either adding some kind of like set of hills for a course that you're working or just changing pace at all, it could go down as small as, I think specifically for quality workouts, we don't include closes, but for some people that might be their first introduction. And so that can kind of fall into that bucket. Closes are actually like a good way to lead up to quality workouts, but really it's...

Progressively faster finish is what you mean there.

Yeah.

And then workouts, I mean, the tried and true, the classic versions would be just doing simple race pace work inside of a long run in smaller doses. You know, we love a good two mile or three mile marathon pace interval early in the process of introducing race pace workouts for somebody where you just have that opportunity to practice race pace later in a long run on a little bit tired legs. And then that can escalate to more advanced versions of this as well, where you're mixing in faster paces too to make marathon pace or half marathon pace feel more challenging. You know, our most advanced long run workouts are going to be pretty elaborate in a sense where you are doing some race pace, often interspersed with faster paced work to really get that feeling of that late race fatigue in your legs through some of that faster turnover work mixed in. And so this stuff can be pretty elaborate, pretty advanced, but a lot of fun and usually big confidence builders, because if you can do those long run workouts, it says, hey, I can go do this on race day. So it's a big hallmark of our training. And if you're not doing long run workouts yet, then this would might be something to consider introducing to your program over time. But obviously, you want to do it gradually. We talked about examples. I think we talked about the McClung special before, which is one of our trademark long run workouts where you do a warm up, then a start simulator, maybe four to five miles of working from 30 seconds lower than race pace to race pace. You do a hard fart lick in the middle, one minute on, one minute off, alternating 5K pace and easy. You get another break and then you have a five or four or five mile close where you're working into race pace and then trying to close faster off of race pace. That's one of our hallmark more advanced long run workouts. And if you can do that, then that gives you a lot of confidence for race day. Now, I wouldn't want somebody to jump into these until they get to the distance and the quantity of long runs that we talked about previously. So this is definitely that next step in an evolution for somebody who's been able to build up to, say, 5 or 6, 20 milers for a half, or, sorry, for a full, or 3 to 4, 14 to 16 milers for a half marathon block. That's when, when you can get to those levels, then you can say, all right, now it's time to introduce the quality component.

Yeah, it's just like everything, like building up towards it, like seeing it as that advancement, like when you're ready for it. You know, I was thinking almost like a safe way to, anyone like learning it and trying to put their mind around it for the first time, it's like, it's okay to associate this with the race-specific phase. That's when I do, quote, quality long runs. But then ask yourself, in the spirit of learning, what would be the, like, why would I ever add them sooner than that? And in that way, that can be continued learning on how some coaches go about it. But it's probably best to just think of it as like, hey, in my race-specific phase, I tend to think of that's where long run qualities go, et cetera.

So yeah, and we call them simulators. We also call them dress rehearsals because the idea is that you try to bring everything to the table that you're going to practice for race day. Same gear you're going to wear, the same shoes you're going to wear, the same nutrition plan you're going to use, the same hydration plan you're going to use, the same pre-run fueling routine that you're going to have. And so you try to mimic those conditions and variables as closely as possible so that you can practice them, see what works, see what doesn't work. And hopefully if you, something's not working, obviously change it in time for race day so that you've got it all dialed in. And so that's another ancillary benefit. We also often do these on what we call simulator courses where you're trying to simulate the race terrain as best as possible. And we have a famous CIM, or California International Marathon Simulator Route. We have a famous Boston Simulator Route where we're trying to mimic the terrain of Boston with the early downhills and the Newton Hills later. And so we like to get creative with these so that you can also adapt to the elevation changes, the hills you might see on race day, and make that a part of the equation as well. So there you go. Those are our six questions. How long? Longer than you think. How many? More than you think. How fast? Lower than you think. Can I go too fast? Absolutely. How to fuel and hydrate? More than you think. And how do I incorporate longer and workouts? Do it gradually and safely and iteratively. Don't jump in all at once. So that's the quick summary. Any final thoughts for this episode?

I think that was the perfect final thought, but since you opened it to me, I'm actually going to pose a question. That way you can control how long or short you want to go with the response. The question is, but why in the book is it titled Church of the Long Run? What's going on there? I feel like we hit the technical extremely well today, so I'm going to tee you up with.

The Church of the Long Run. We like to call it that. I think there's a lot of reasons for that. When you dig into the metaphorical meaning of that phrase, Church of the Long Run, Church of the Saturday Long Run in our case, one aspect of it is the community element, right? Church is a community experience in whatever denomination or religion you might be associated with, where you're coming together with your people and you're surrounding yourself with the accountability and the community and the support that comes with that. And so I think that's one reason why we call it the Church of the Long Run, because it's this opportunity for the whole community of Rogue to come together and do the thing together, just like you might with a religious service. So that's one part. I think the other part I think about with it is it's the bread and butter, you know, or the bread and wine in the case of some religious sacraments, where you're getting the fundamentals, you know, and that's that weekly reminder of the fundamental things that you need as a part of your religion. And for us, it's a part of our movement practice, where we're getting just this weekly dose of the fundamentals, the easy running, the long running to build aerobic capacity, neuromuscular resilience, feeling adaptation, so that we can have everything we need when it comes to race day. So those are the two kinds of things I think about. It's the community, but it's also just the bread and butter fundamentals of our religion in this case, in air quotes, with our movement practice.

Mm-hmm, I love that.

So, there you go.

I knew people would be a little curious, so.

What is, yeah, what is your routine around your church of the long run? And we say that with all respect to the religions out there. But anyway, but I think that's a good place to wrap it. So we will. Couple of reminders as we wrap. One, check us out at roguerunning.com. Now is a good time to join our training programs as we start to prepare for fall races. All of our groups are open for that, both virtually and in person in Austin and Dallas. And if you're not sure navigating the site, just email us, coaching at roguerunning.com, and we can point you in the right direction to the group that's appropriate to you. Also a reminder, on Fridays at 2 p.m. Central, every Friday we do a Q&A on our Instagram at RogueRunning. Instagram Live with James and I, answering your questions could be about this topic, could be about your training. We always have really good questions for 30 minutes or so. So check that out if you're interested, 2 p.m. Central on Fridays on at Rogue Running. And I think that's it. So we'll wrap it there. And we'll see you guys, talk to you guys next week after you get your long runs in.