Hey everybody, it is episode 24 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is Chris joining, and I've got Steve with me.

Hello world.

We are continuing our episode on the coach athlete relationship. We've got the rest of the one-on-one talk between Steve and I that we started on the last episode, episode 23, and then we're gonna finish up today with some tips bringing it all together on how to have a good and solid coach athlete relationship. So that's our main topic. We'll get to it in a second. First, we've got some current events that we've gotta talk about. The first one, Steve, I've gotta bring up because you made a statement the other day. I believe this was on the social, the interwebs that I thought was pretty bold. Picked it up. I think it was a comment on someone else's post. But Killian Jornet, trail runner, probably arguably the best trail runner in the world, recently accomplished a feat at Everest. He climbed Mount Everest from base camp all the way to the peak of Everest and then back to, I believe, the advanced camp in 26 hours or so. 26 hours. With no oxygen, no fixed ropes.

Yes.

Kind of running, so to speak, but really fast hiking. And then he said at the end, stepping through it. But as the first time anybody's ever done it that fast with no oxygen, no ropes from base camp.

And not just faster, like...

Way faster.

Days. Like a day faster, like in half the time. If not even, I don't even know what the...

I think high 40s was the previous record for that. But anyway, he did it from base camp to the top of Everest in an insanely fast amount of time. And this is a part of his pursuit to reach some of the world's tallest peaks, sort of speed hiking, so to speak, as quickly as he can. And he's won one hard rock the last couple of years, which is arguably the toughest trail, 100 in the US. He's run Mont Blanc, won Mont Blanc in Europe. So he's the man on the trails, but he's taken it beyond that. Now he's got this FKT on Everest, going from base camp to the summit in 26 hours. No ropes, no oxygen. So your comment, as someone had posted about that, was that he has to be considered as one of the greatest of all time runners, distance runners, the GOAT. He has to be in the conversation. That to me is a bold statement. We've talked about McKaylee, we've talked about Kipchoge. Those are the big names. We've talked about Jebroslossy at one point in that discussion.

I even went all the way back to Zatopec and Viren.

Correct. But this gets us off the track, off the roads, off the traditional definition of a distance runner to someone who is doing it in a different way on the trails and now on the highest peaks in the world. Back up your statement.

So first of all, it was purposefully inflammatory. Purposely designed to get some people's attention and to see what kind of reaction would happen. I have a tendency to flame and I flamed away. But my main purpose for doing it is to bring attention to not only this young man and what he's been doing quietly, I think, not quietly in the trail world. If you pay attention to trail running, trail runners around the world know who this guy is because of the kinds of accolades he's done, the things that he's been able to accomplish. He's won Western States, he's won Hard Rock. He's run times and posted times on some courses that are absolutely mind boggling where he is considerably faster than anybody else's time. And he does it with a relative ease. I don't know if anybody's read his book. I can't remember the name of it right now, but I read it and I was off put by, he's certainly not shy and he was willing to toot his own horn in a lot of ways. But it's a pretty compelling read. It was really interesting. I think he probably wrote this book a little bit young. Could have benefited from maybe a couple more years of experience, but I'm sure we'll see subsequent books as we go along. But his website is called Summits of My Life and that is a great location for folks to go to get more intel on Killian. But my main point is this, is that we're not, people don't talk about, runners come in all shapes, they come in, there's lots of different disciplines in running. And when we talk about distance running, to me that's anything from the 800 meters to the longest distance you can possibly pick, you know? With middle distance being sort of 800 and 1500, maybe arguably 3000, we don't do that very often, but there are occasionally done, and then sort of through the 5000 and beyond. But nobody really talks or gives credit to the accolades of the athletes in the ultra world and the trail running world. And now with what Killian is doing, which is sort of this sort of FKT craziness that's going on right now, which is super cool and interesting. But I think this guy's successes and the way that he's won repeatedly everywhere and with the ease with which he's won puts him as definitely the best trail runner ever or the best ultra runner ever, in my opinion. And I think there'll be people who will come out and argue for some other folks in that regard. But we are now seeing over the last five to 10 years a big push in the ultra world of fast runners moving to the ultra as opposed to ultra runners sort of starting and staying in that mode, right? And so I think Killian is the greatest example of that. And I think the thing that he just did this past weekend with his Everest climb, certainly the epicness of it, it shocked everyone around the world, Mountaineers to the trail running world, to the ultra world, to everybody. Everybody tipped their hat to that kind of experience, to what he did. So, you know, is he, I probably wouldn't put he and Kipchoge side by side at this moment, but I do say there's an argument to actually consider that he's the best in his discipline to not include him in the conversation is isn't really fair. You know, what about Sebastian Koh? You know, you gotta say, one of the greatest middle distance runners of all time, he won two Olympic gold medals in the 1500, was also a medalist in the 800, set the world record in both of those events, and held sway in the world with Steve Ovett for a number of years. So, for 10 plus years, I think. So, you know, these folks, we can probably run down a list of 15 to 20 people who we could say are arguably in play for the greatest of all time, and I'm making an argument for people to consider Killian in that statement. I'm not saying he is, I'm just saying, needs to be considered, and it should shine a light on a sort of dark world that people aren't paying as much attention to.

Let's shine the light, I like that. It's also worth mentioning that Killian holds the FKT for the fastest ascent and descent of Denali, which is the highest point in the 50 US states. So he's done it, he's won Western States, he's won UTMB, won Hard Rock. So you're right, he's gotta be considered in the GOAT conversation for trail runners.

Well, also another thing I think that's important is, and this is really the only people gonna pay attention to the sort of people who watch it, you know, Allison Maxis, our guest for last week, who is co-owner of Rogue Expeditions. You know, she and I geek out over this stuff, because we spend a lot more time thinking about this now that we're, we spend a lot of time in the mountains, so we really pay attention to it. The things he's doing in the FKT world, or the fastest known time world, are just mind, are mind-blowing. What he's doing, and the speeds with which he's doing it, are really the real reason. I don't really consider him and put him in the greatest of all time argument, just because of the stuff that he did in Trail Races, or what he just did at Everest. I think it's more this body of work that he's put together, and the kind of, just dominance he's doing it with, and the ease he's doing it with. No one else can keep up with him. Nobody can even go with him.

He's been making people look silly at Hard Rock.

Yes.

For sure.

Yes.

This to me draws an interesting comparison to, pardon the crude analogy, to the dog show world. Whereas in a dog show, when you're talking about best in show, it's not the best dog in the show. It's the best dog in its category as a representation of that category. So if you were to, and maybe we need to have a whole episode on the goat conversation. But if you were to choose the goat from every category and then compare goats, not necessarily against each other, but sort of versus the standard in their field, then I think, and if you think about Killian in that way versus trying to, as you say, draw the direct comparison, if you think about his body of work in the context of the trail and ultra and mountain running world, you have to argue that it's, or you have to be able to argue that it's near the sorts of things that Kipchoge has been able to do in marathoning, but just in a different world. So it is an interesting discussion. I think the thing for me that might keep him out of the conversation is the fact that with Kipchoge, you have this kind of depth of dominance. And even in trail, with Killian, if you compare it to some others, you've got people that have won more Western states, have won more hard rocks, have years and years of dominance in certain events at the top of that sport, where he has sort of decided, hey, I'm gonna go run something maybe once or twice, dominate it, and then I'm gonna find a new place to play. And so the thing I think that's missing from his resume is some of that kind of depth of dominance, but certainly his spectrum and variety of dominance and what he's doing now, especially when it comes to scaling peaks, is out of this world.

I mean, he is 29 years old, so he's got a little more time. But I do think, Chris, one argument also against the GOAT argument for Killian is we have at least 115 or 20 years. I really think modern athletics started in 1896. I don't think there's any argument about that with the Olympic Games in Athens when Wendy Cupertain started that all back up. You have 100 years of people running 26.2 miles, or as we found out, 26-ish miles, right?

Right.

Until they finally got it all clear. But people have been running the 10, 000 and the 5, 000 and this mile and the 1, 500 for 100 plus years. And they've been doing it in a way that we've been tracking and watching. We've got heroes and villains, and we've been able to see the whole storyline from start to finish in the athletic world of the 800 all the way to the 10, 000. We don't have that depth of experience in the ultra running world. We have the great mountaineers of the 20s, 30s, 40s, 50s, or the teens, you know? I mean, Mallory, one of our guests, was named after one of those climbers. But they were more about getting to the tops of things than it wasn't about the speed with which they did it. And so this is still a super young sport. And because of that, I would immediately have to say that if we look and sort of say who's the best and which one, I would give Killian two drops for the lack of history associated with this event. And I know, I think you're about to bring up another point, and I'll let you bring it up, but I'll feed you it, right? So there's also, this is the Wild West. What he's doing, fastest known time, there's no real governing body. This is all stuff people paying attention to with the internet and with our new ability to track people with GPSs and those kinds of things. So some of that means, are people doing what they really said they did, and are people doing it in a way that, are they held to the same standard that a Kipchoge or an Isbel Kiprop or a Seb Co was held to? So why don't you?

Well, Kipchoge, when he was going for his sub 2 result, he was on camera the whole time. I could track it. I could set my own stopwatch to it if I wanted to. Killian's result after I saw it, my first reaction, literally the word I thought it was, unbelievable. What he did to me is unbelievable. It's in the spectrum of, I don't know if I believe that that's even possible, what he did. Because you're talking about Everest. Four people have already died this year on that mountain.

I think one or two died that weekend.

And it's early in the season, right? That is. So what you're talking about, going from base camp to the top of Everest in 16 hours, by yourself, unsupported, with no oxygen, no fixed ropes. It's a dangerous venture. He's summited supposedly at midnight, but no one was there to see that. So it does make me question at some little part of my brain. I'm not questioning it at all. I'm going to believe that he did it. I'm going to choose to believe that. But there is a small part of my brain that whispers, gosh, if it's too good to be true, maybe it is. And so there's a little bit of that certainly in my head. With him and with this. But I think it goes to your point, which is that it's the Wild West. There's not a lot of tracking and history and ability to compare like we have in track and field, where you run in set distances, on set ovals, that everybody knows and understands and has been happening since the late 1800s. You know, so I think that's a point. But it's impressive nonetheless. And I'm going to choose to believe it until somebody tells me otherwise. I do know that that world, when it comes to Everest, they don't mess around. They verify stuff, you know, five ways a Sunday. And there's a person in Kathmandu actually records who climbed and summited Everest, when they did it, who they were with, when they got to the top, all the stuff, the conditions at the time. There is absolute tracking when it comes to all of that stuff. And if that world chooses to believe, based on all of, you know, the verification processes and things that they have in place, then I'll believe too. Because they won't let him get away. You know, they're serious about their mountain, and they won't let him get away with a story that's not believable. So, you know, if they all kind of vet it and it passes, then I believe too. But I'm just saying, there's a little bit of doubt in the back of my mind there.

I think he's going to give you a second chance because he actually didn't reach the objective he really wanted to.

Which is to get all the way back down.

Because he got sick, and he got really, really sick to the point where he said, I just can't continue. And so I do think we will get another chance. I don't think he's going to walk away from this not having gotten exactly what he wanted. And so that should be interesting.

Yeah, but just to be clear, I pass that skepticism on not as a critique, but as almost a compliment to say it is so impressive that it puts it in the realm of unbelievable.

In a one month period of time, we had someone nearly break two hours, and another person get to the top of Mount Everest and bet in 26 hours. So the way that people think about what the human, this makes my argument that I try to make all the time, limits are perceived, they are not real. And there are certain limits that we have, but well-trained folks doing really hard work with intent are pushing the boundaries of what human beings are capable of. And that's pretty amazing.

I will also say about him, what I know about him from sort of watching as a fan of the sport broadly, he seems like a good guy who wouldn't pull any shit.

Huge respect.

So he has bad respect and trust in that world. And I carry that. So mad props to him for this accomplishment. I hope he heals and gets down safely and all of that. So nice work, Killian. You're frankly the trail badass of the world and have proved it yet again with your ever summit. That skepticism we ended that segment on kind of feeds our next segment, which is that we got to talk about, unfortunately, again, doping in our sport in track and field. Recently, the USADA, US Anti-Doping Administration, report on Alberto Salazar and the Oregon Project came or got leaked. Some hackers came across it, leaked it to the internet. Fancy bears. It's been fancy bears. They've been reported on now by New York Times and other outlets basically detailing all of the allegations that Kara Goucher, Steve Magnus, and David Epstein brought forward now about 18 months ago, accusing the Oregon Project of playing dirty. And maybe not breaking the rules explicitly, but playing way too deep in the gray, especially as it relates to injections, IVs, whether they be saline or other things. So we've got the full...

And some potentially nefarious doctoring going on.

When it comes to medical records and prescriptions and things like that. So there's a 200-ish page report out there that you can go find now. And if you want to dig into it, and I encourage you if you're interested at all in doping in the sport, get in there, read 20 pages, 50 pages, 200 pages, because it's eye-opening. And I think the more educated you can be about these things, the more informed you can talk about them, and the more informed you can be as a fan in making your decisions about who to support. But it's out there. We have to talk about it. I'll give you my opinions in a second. What's your reaction to it? Because, Steve, I got to, you know, throw some shade your way, because you were all up in the Salazar camp when we were talking about Boston. I was all up in his business, man. So where are you now with Salazar?

I am... Well, I'm in the same place. I met Alberto Salazar in 2002. We had him come in to Austin. I actually paid to have him come and talk at a kickoff to a marathon training program that we did the first time we... our first Rogue program, I believe, or the Run Techs University program we did. I had an opportunity to meet him. And so I already knew that he... I knew his personality type, and I knew based on conversations with him that it was incredibly... is a prickly character. And certainly not someone that seemed to be incredibly altruistic, nor did he seem empathetic. And so, you know, I've never been of the belief that Alberto Salazar is the easiest person in the world to get along with, or even necessarily a person I would get along with. But I basically have to say that results at this point in time are all that should matter in the conversations that we have about what coaches are accomplishing with their athletes unless we find they're breaking the rules. And so, in my opinion, I have chosen, as I've repeated many times on this podcast, innocence until proven guilty. There's nothing in this Usada document, which by the way, is not a report. It wasn't supposed to get released. It's not supposed to be released. In fact, there's people arguing there could be some serious litigation issues going towards Usada from the Oregon Project and Nike themselves, which is probably why there's so much silence. Alberto did send out an e-mail response or used Ken Groh from the Eugene Oregonian to basically refute this, although his refutation was really pretty limp-wristed, in my opinion, not very strong. So my thing is, what I read in those papers, in those documents, was basically that this guy, he is an aggressive, aggressive human being pushing the absolute edges of what can be done with the human body within the construct of the rules that Usada and Wada have put out there. Ethics are not in his, he's not an ethical human being, in my opinion. In our initial email conversation, text conversation, Chris and I text back and forth all the time. When we did it first, my first statement was the absolute gut wrenching disappointment in the way he treated his athletes. To me, as a coach, I respect Alberto for his results. I would love to see what his training protocols are and how they work. And actually, I listened to a podcast that Kerry Tollefson did recently on Jordan Hussay, and Jordan Hussay has only, she's drinking the Kool-Aid, but she said amazing things about Alberto. Her mother passed away. All the things that he's been to her and for her, I see that side of him. But what is in this paper is absolutely damning an indictment to him as a human being, and certainly as a Christian man. I'm just sorry. I've got absolutely no respect for him if he calls himself that, unless being a Catholic is something different than being a Christian. I'm not going to go down that road too far because I'm going to get in trouble with a lot of people, but his ethics are not even, they are so far outside beyond the bounds of what a coach should be doing and how a coach should be treating their athletes. It sickens me. What he has done to athletes in terms of brow-beating, making them nervous, making them freaked out about their jobs, it's a way to get results, but it's also not a great way to handle a human being. So honestly, what I see in these papers, I see a guy pushing the edges. I see a guy who, again, that's not against the law. I mean, if anybody's in trouble, it's Dr. Richard Brown, in my opinion. Now, Alberto did things that the law could come after him about because he was giving people his prescriptions, supposedly, and sort of lying to them about what medical procedures were going on. But the real culpability, in my mind, sits with Dr. Richard Brown. If you don't know that name, you'll have to dig through the papers.

He's the endocrinologist that the Oregon Project uses to kind of justify some of the thyroid meds and other things that athletes are getting on, potentially without needing them, really.

So the short version is, I actually don't have any problem without what... I don't have a real big issue, and I'm not going to damn Galen Rupp, even though I think he's probably being forced to do all these other things as an athlete, as much as I'm going to say what Alberto doing, in my opinion, is beyond the pale in terms of ethics.

Yeah, I mean, the facts to me of the doping elements aren't really new. I mean, I'm the one that I sort of took Kara and Steve and the original report sort of at their word that he was pushing the envelopes, trying to get people subscriptions for things that they shouldn't have, giving people injections maybe that they shouldn't have. And we get a little bit more detail around that, especially as it relates to this particular, I guess this amino acid, L-Cartinine, which is intended to give you some performance enhancing features. He was really testing and pushing the envelope around that. And the only, what seemed to me, new information from the report was that he was giving people and athletes IVs of that supplement, amino acid, whatever, longer and in higher volumes than were allowed by the world anti-doping standards. So that seemed to be the most egregious part of the doping stuff in it. But more than that, you get real color on how he treated athletes, especially those outside of Rupp and Hussay, who seemed to be sort of the privileged, chosen ones in that group. Anybody else who was fighting for their scraps in that group was pressured into taking drugs that they didn't need to from quote unquote prescriptions for thyroid imbalances and things like that. Asking them to do things they weren't comfortable with, pressuring them with not just the threats of kind of getting on the outside of the group, but also potentially using his leverage with Nike to kind of pressure them from a contract and financial standpoint. Talking about how Dathan Ritzenhine was basically at risk of getting his salary cut in half because of performance. And so kind of he made the decision, I'm going to do what Salazar said because I can't afford not to. So those elements coming into play, it's sort of like Lance and his, you know, there was the doping, but there was also the way he treated people and how he tried to sort of scorched earth anybody who ever accused him. And it seemed with Alberto, it's sort of like the way he treated athletes and pressured them and encouraged them to do things they weren't comfortable with, not OK. And that's where his real, the real indictments of him as a coach come. And I don't know how it makes me feel about RUP, but I do know it makes me not like that group, Nike, because of its affiliation with that group, even though I like Schumacher's group in that same fold. And I come from a camp in the doping world that's sort of like, I'd rather you be bread and water, you know, with maybe the occasional fruit juice or vitamin D drops or, you know, Evan Jagger was interviewed one time, and he's like, occasionally I take Sudafed, you know, because my nose gets stopped up. I want to be in that world. That would be where I would live. And that's where I want to believe the athletes I choose to follow and cheer for live. And the athletes that live in this kind of gray area governed by Alberto's ethics, it's not for me, even if it's clean technically by whatever standards. So I agree with you ultimately that it's the coaching athlete relationship part that he absolutely messed up. And some of those accusations are egregious. And I would never want to role model as a coach myself.

You know, but again, I had read all those things and I was angry about it, honestly. I mean, what do I matter in the context of what goes on in the monolith of Nike and Alberto's gold medals and continued incredible performances with athletes? But I did listen to the Kerry Tollefson podcast with Jordan again. I'm referencing that again. And Jordan's gotten absolutely nothing but, I mean, he is a father figure to her. And he's not all bad. So, you know, it's not that. It's just that he's a dog with a bone that he will not give up. And getting the results that he has to get and the ways with which he was trying to get them and has been trying to get them is spooky. And you also, I mean, I don't want to go down the whole rumor mill world, but having been involved in professional athletics, professional track and field in a small way over the years, you hear lots and lots of stories about things that have happened with Alberto, or at least with that group. And some of the real details that come out in these papers are sort of, it's cut from the same cloth, it's sort of the same behavioral ways of managing that may make some of the stories that people have told about shipments going through the mail and people bringing stuff back from other locations and other things that folks have talked about. There's indications that there was already behaviors that were showing that that might happen and the complete control and lockdown of all training and medical information for anybody to get are things that then make you question even more how deep into this does it go. And the people that we're talking about are people who shared. Roebury, Centro, Rupp, Hussay, shut down, locked down, no conversation. The only place that there is a crack in that armor is in Sir, what's his name, from Great Britain? Mo Farah. So there is the chink in their armor where Mo Farah is a Lance caliber athlete. And there is a much greater scrutiny in the UK through the press on things of this nature. And they're looking to flame and take down their heroes all the time. So I do think there's a chance that, I don't think you're going to get anything much more substantive if this is all we've got, and if it's getting leaked or if it was leaked or whether it was stolen one way or another. It does seem to be, you know, Patty Cake, Patty Cake, Baker's Man, and not some horrific thing. So I don't know, we'll see. I still, I don't know where I'm still going to, and your reference to me having to eat crow a little bit, yes. My complete, I've always been tentative and hesitant in my love for Alberto and Galen and that crew, but I really have a hard time cheering for at least Alberto as a coach and will always take some kind of question mark to how I view him as one of the great coaches in the world because of the way he handled dealing with these athletes in ways that he absolutely did not need to do.

And I think the one thing to note, especially for me, you know, I'm the cynic, the skeptic, the one that kind of always questions, as I think about my fan relationship, because that's all it is, with Salazar, with Rupp, with that group, with Jordan Essay, with Centro, from that same fold, with Shannon, Robury, that's a world where I'm just conflicted. I'm a fan of the sport. I'm a fan of the US in the sport. I love seeing the results that they get. But my relationship with them, sort of fan to athlete, is complicated. And some people would look and listen to me and say, Chris, you're a hater. You just hate those people. You're always throwing cynicism and skepticism around and all that. And while I do that occasionally, it's much more complicated than that. I'm also at some level a fan of what they're doing and can appreciate aspects of what they're doing. But it comes with some hedges and some complications versus others where I can wholeheartedly be a fan of Emma Coburn without question, without doubts, without having a complicated fan athlete relationship. I can do the same with Jenny Simpson, with Kara Goucher, with Meb. And I've given them, and some people say, well, Chris, you haven't really given them the same scrutiny. And that's not true. I read everything. I watch everything. I listen to every interview. And so I've watched a pattern of behavior, of results, of how they interact, when these kinds of questions get asked, and all of those things. And I've studied them at the same level I've had, you know, these other athletes. And so I can walk away with all that information and say, hey, I can believe wholeheartedly without complication in these athletes versus, you know, this corner of the Oregon Project and Salazar and Centro and Rupp, it's just more complicated. I'm not a fan. But my relationship is just more complicated, and I think it's important as this type of information comes out that everybody who's listening puts their, you know, first of all, reads the direct information.

Correct.

Right? Don't take New York Times version of it, while that's a pretty good source. You know, you're going to have other sources that, you know, might filter it or choose the things they want to kind of draw out. Go straight to the report. You don't have to read all of it. Read 20 pages, read 10 pages, read a page. And just see what it teaches you and you learn. And so when you're talking about it and where you're making decisions about who you support, you can fully back it up with direct information. It's just like anything, politics, you know, or anything else. Just get the direct information, make your own decisions about who you're going to support, what you think about it, what your opinions are. And certainly factor in perhaps what we think into that. And then, you know, and then go root for this support, because there are still people to believe in. And if your relationship is now more complicated with the Oregon Project, fine, because that's what it is for me.

And life is messy and complicated.

Yes, and no one's perfect.

One thing I do want to state, I don't know if you saw this, Chris, and it's probably a bit of minutiae that we don't even need to share on this podcast, but it was irritating to me. A couple weeks ago or last week, we recommended to you Let's run.com as a source to get initial information. As Chris said, dig deeper. Don't take just their word for it and things. But they threw serious shade on Mark Wetmore right at the end of that. And I'm not sure if you saw that section.

They did because of the doctor affiliation.

Yeah, the way that Alberto Salazar became acquainted with Dr. Richard Brown, the endocrinologist from Houston, was through Mark Wetmore's recommendation to Adam Goucher, Kara Goucher's husband, that he go see the greatest, the best endocrinologist in the world. Well, that's a very... And I don't know if it was we, Joe Orojo, Weldon, or Robert Who basically said, oh, this brings to light some, this could bring to light some interesting discussion. That was, guys, that was uncalled for. That was unnecessary. Not that I'm, I am an apologist for Mark Wetmore. I get it. But don't, that's how you, that's how silly stuff starts. Leave it alone. That was a conversation. So, somehow, Mark Wetmore figured out there's a really good end chronologist in the world. And people who have a thyroid issue should go see the best end chronologist in the world, even if they are or they aren't the best in the world, best runner, or they're a distance runner. Guys, leave that alone. That was some serious bullshit.

Especially to end that way.

That's how they ended the whole article. That was bullshit. And I don't like that at all. Again, it's not about the Wetmore thing. It's like, that's almost irresponsible journalism, in my opinion. I know they were making a point, but they wrote it in a way that made it seem like, well, maybe somebody should go down this road and look into this.

Right. And it left it too open-ended. But it reiterates my point, which is just go get the direct information yourself and make your own decisions about who you're going to cheer for, who you're going to hate, who you're going to love, whatever.

But please cheer and hate and love.

Yes. And do it with us.

Yes.

I ran into a listener the other day who recognized me by my voice, which is so weird. But he said, we always apologize for talking about current events in the sport and going too long in this stuff, but we shouldn't. Yes. Because he loved it. So anyway, so we're not going to apologize anymore, but we appreciate you indulging us on this probably too long intro to episode 24, part two of our discussion on the coach-athlete relationship. We're going to segue into that now. And we'll start just to kind of bring us back to where we were when the last episode finished with Steve's very important question. And we'll go from there.

What will it take?

Going back on the goal quickly though.

Go ahead.

I do think it's worth mentioning because this has been a part of my process. We talked about that goal of mine in one of the episodes recently. I think it was one of the mental episodes. I don't remember exactly the context, but that conversation, as I was preparing not just for this, but as I was preparing myself for my next round of training, also made me sit back and be like, wait a minute, why was that my goal? Because at the time when I said that to myself and I was in my 20s, I'm like, it was just a number, really. And I probably even at that time wasn't even a sub-three-hour marathoner, but it was just a number that seemed like far enough away. So as a part of our recent discussion on it, I had to kind of go back and be like, is that the number? Reassess whether or not that was the number. If it's just something I had been kind of artificially carrying with me because I had arbitrarily picked it out of the air a long time ago. And anyway, so I came back around to it's, that's the number. You know, magic, divine, whatever things, the forces of the universe were telling me that was the number then, and it's still the number. So yes, that's the BHAG. How do I get there is the question. I want to also layer in a couple of sub-goals to that goal, just to kind of for context, which I don't think are necessarily BHAG, but that I want to accomplish at some point in this journey. If I were to prioritize my race goals and mention a few others besides that one, that one's obviously the number one most important and I think makes my sphincter pucker the most. But there are two others that matter. One that's more short term, which is that I got to break 60 and run for the water this year. This will be my seventh attempt. I've run 60.02. I've run 60.07. I've run six times between 60 and 61.15 or something like that. And this year, I got to go under 60.

That's really crucial. It's really cool because that's a what will it take? I mean, you literally are answering what will it take. What will it take for you to have the confidence level in order to be able to go for the next step is to say, I got to get under this thing. Because every time you've done that race, at least as long as I've been coaching you, it's never been the command performance. It's always been a step in the process. It's always been sort of a piece of the puzzle, one key piece. And hats off to Gilbert and his crew at Run for the Water for creating just an amazing race that is iconic and really cool. And I hope never goes away, because in Central Texas, this is a race that's super hilly. It's 10 miles. There are not many of those around. And it's sort of like a great gut check for marathoners, half marathoners, 5Kers, 10Kers, to kind of figure out where they're at. And so it's a tough course. So if you hear going sub-60 in a 10-mile race, that's not really indicative of Chris's fitness.

I've run faster than that at 3M.

Many times. But that was what I wanted to make the point of, is that this is a particular course. It's probably going to be in another particular space in your progression as you look towards. You're probably not going to try to run super fast at X, right? And this is going to be one step in the process. So that's awesome because it's falling in. None of your goals are also falling in. What will it take? One thing is if you go 59 there, you're like, I'm on the path.

Yeah. I also, that race has a special place for me, for whatever reason. It's a local race. It's probably my favorite local race. It's challenging. So there's that element to it.

You also have a competitive. You also have a guy.

But there's also the competitive thing. And it's not just with Mark. Mark H. Who's my sort of foil in a lot of local races. But there are also other local athletes that I get to compete with there. And I've gone head to head with them. And sometimes I've won. Sometimes I've lost. Mark H has handed me my ass more than I have in recent years. But I've made him scared many times, you know. And so it's fun tactical experience as well, because you actually get to race with people you know. And I think that brings out the best in you. Certainly when I ran 60.02, I remember I did it. I'd driven back from Dallas. I had an event there. We drove back in the middle of the night. I got back in at like 1 a.m., 2 a.m. Felt like dog shit going into that race because I hadn't slept. And had, ultimately, the best race there, but felt miserable the whole way because it was a race. I was competing. So I dug deep and Mark actually carried me.

And you didn't have any mental excuses at that point because you'd already gotten rid of every single one of them by all the drama that you had to deal with to get to the starting line. So at that point, it really just became, you went back to basics. You would have done what you did at 5.30 in the morning on a Tuesday or a Thursday or a Saturday. You just went back to going through the motions and as a baseball player, get in the batting box. Don't try to hit a home run. Get your swing right. And you didn't have a choice. You either didn't show up or you showed up. And when you showed up, you showed up just going through the motions and doing exactly what you're supposed to do. Again, it shows so much how the mental piece of this game is essential and important.

And there wasn't three more seconds to be had that day, but there will be in November. I think November 5th is the day this year. So the other goal I want to mention is that at some point, and this doesn't have to be this year, at some point in the context of all of this 240 search, I do want to run another 5K. Because as you say, I think battling the demons there mentally, I haven't raced a 5K in probably five or six years. It's been a long time. And I certainly haven't been in the fitness to race a 5K in a long time, other than just sort of peripherally kind of tagging on with other fitness. But I've never run under 17 flat for the 5K. My 5K PR is 1720 or 1721. Not very impressive, really, when you look at some of my other races. But I want to get under 17 for the 5K. And I think I've been maybe fit enough to do that at some point, but I've just not ever raced it. And I think that could be an important part of this journey, is just tapping into some of that speed at some point. But anyway, if I were to rank my goals, those three would be at the top of my list right now. There's others related to the half and other distances, but we won't go there.

So what I do with my athletes at this point is I'll say, because I got some key things there, and again, I'm an intuitive coach, so I'm not going through the numbers, right? I'm just going down it and saying, I know what the 5K can do to a person, and I know the 5K is a marathon. It's like a plum is a plum, but a prune is a prune. A plum is a marathon, and a prune is a 5K. It is an extremely distilled experience of being a plum.

Same prune, same prune.

And you can do it over and over and over again. It gives you the shits, for sure, but you do it over and over and over again. And I think that that is a great... Right where you're at right now, continuously checking yourself against 5K workouts, 5K races, occasionally seeing the difference between those two for you, because I always throw 5K, key 5K workouts in my cycles. I went away from that a couple of years ago when we did big lydian cycles, but I've moved back to bringing it in in sort of everything all the time kind of manner, because they're really good gut checks, and they really do tell me pretty clearly how an athlete's going to respond to the marathon pressures, because late in some of these key workouts, you get exposed. And so I would suggest to you, continuously using that race distance, I mean, because the run for the water 10-miler is just a key moment in time, and it will always be, at least as long as you're being competitive, sort of a threshold to check yourself. But a 5K is one, on a given day, in a given circumstances with competition. Because we've got two things going on here. You've got the competition in yourself, and you've got the competition against others mixed in. And so the competition with yourself can be using those 5K workouts and or occasional races to just check in and not looking at them as reading the tea leaves at the bottom of a cup of tea and saying, this is exactly indicative. Although I will tell you, for an athlete like you, who is very similar to Allison, you're becoming an aerobic monster. Allison is an aerobic monster because she had no choice to not be one. I mean, if I go through and do a muscle biopsy of you, and we check you, no matter how long you spent time playing soccer, you are not speed, fast twitch, muscle guy. You worked those to the best of your ability, and you probably got more of them than you ever could. But you're type 2, you're not going to be giving us the pop. I'll get you off the line if I'm a fat and old man in a wheelchair, guaranteed, right? Because I've got a lot more of the fast twitch muscles in me. But you don't. So you're now continuing to, you're getting to the point where you're an aerobic, you're a sound aerobic athlete. And you're going to continue to get more and more. You're going to take you more time to get to be the aerobic monster that Allison is. But you're getting there. You've had some disrupts and some hiccups lately in your training, given the injuries that you've had, which really are the real challenges you have now. That we have to kind of, if we're going to be completely open about that, these are the real big things you have. Not only the physiological challenge you have of dealing with the fact that you're behind the eight ball now nearly a year. Right? You have had some ups and downs to that process. But we're a year down this road of being in and out and in and out. It hasn't been absolutely zero mileage week in, week out, month in, month out, but it's been your worst 12 months of training since...

Since I started running.

You're probably more consistent in the time that you were working and going to school and doing other things than you were even in this context. Not because you didn't want to, just because you couldn't. So we've got to continue to keep working that aerobic system. We're going to have to do some key things training-wise to do that, but I just want to go back to I think that this goal of the 5K is a great sort of spotlight to shine on your current fitness. Not indicative of your long-term goal, but more indicative of where you are at the moment. And it will always be a great check. And when the worst of days happen on a you know, when we do a I'm on a Getty fart lick, or if we do an Aussie 5K, or you go out and run a race, you're gonna know that, alright, this is a little tiny microcosm of where I'm at, and I'm in the shit, so I gotta get somewhere else, or man, I'm starting to turn it around. Because when Alison ran that Aussie 5K at the time that she did, I was like, we're good, we're ready. We're ready for damn near anything. And I know you know what all those things mean at this point, and it's a great way for you to sort of check yourself. And listeners, this is what I do with my athletes. I just get into the minutia of it, and I say, here are the key things. Right now, what you need to do is continue to shine a kind of ugly, bright, mirrored light on your face to find out what your blemishes are in this key time, because you know you're ugly. And so later, we're going to make you look like the most beautiful model in the world. But right now, we've got to work your ugly.

So let's talk about the ugly, because the last year for me has been ups and downs. The stress fracture was a perfect storm of things, which I don't want to get into why that happened, but you know, vitamin D deficiency and some other things caused that issue. But the other subsequent issues, I don't think were necessarily a systemic issue. It was more the fact that I was behind the A-ball and then kept rushing back too fast. And then as a result of rushing back too fast, kind of got injured again and it restarted the cycle. So let's talk about blemishes or things I need to work on. One thing that I've thought about...

I thought it was next on my list, strengths and weaknesses.

A couple of things that I've thought about from that perspective. One is that I need to get back to first principles when it comes to aerobic development and base building again. So part of the thing I've been thinking about is doing really a fundamental base period over the next two, three months, whatever it is, to get back to just consistent mileage, and maybe higher than I normally am when I'm training with quality work, but 80 miles a week or something like that. And just hammer those out consistently, staying healthy, doing a little bit of strides and a little bit of straights and curves and stuff like that just to keep those...

A couple tempo runs.

Yeah, a couple tempo runs just to keep the speed there, but really focus on mileage because I had shortcut a lot of that, trying to build back, as I did over the last year, and it cost me because I didn't have the right foundation.

Because that's your go-to. So just to give people context, I said Chris' strength, he can be an aerobic monster. He's just not quite there yet. I mean, you're really fast. You've run really fast. So somebody who's sub 245, he's not something to snuff your nose at. But this is his personal journey. And it's like you are really good at doing the aerobic stuff. So let's go back to getting those fundamental principles. It's exactly what we need to do.

So that's one thing. Second thing, that's a weakness, and it's a weakness that's only getting more important to address as I age, is strength. I had started sort of a basic strength routine at the beginning of the year as one of my, call it a resolution, but as one of my initiatives this year to try to prevent some of these injuries. That got short circuited by my elbow fracture nine weeks ago. But I need to definitely incorporate a sustainable for me, minimal but focused strength program to make sure that I can withstand the muscle atrophy of age and, you know, the injuries that might come with that. So that to me is an opportunity area that might be at the top of the list of sort of running support things that I need to worry about. There's some diet stuff that I need to clean up and...

Not right now.

Maybe some other things.

You're already too skinny. I'd rather you go back to fat Chris. I loved it when you were fat Chris.

Maybe some other things.

It makes it a lot easier for you to run. By the way, Chris is never fat. But Chris is particularly... He's one of those sensitives about this area.

I can yoyo a little bit with my training.

It is good for you. When you get in that space, you get stronger. It's probably really good that you're not, given the way that you're coming back right now, to be in that space where you're a little lean enough to get to the point where you can get there, for sure.

Anyway, my main thing in terms of other things I need to worry about is strength and a sustainable routine there. Other than that, there's certainly other things I could do and worry about, but look, I got three kids. I've got a role in this business and I'm a coach myself, so I have limited time. So if I were to focus, initially it's base strength, physical or muscle strength, and then a 10-mile training block to get to that sub-60, maybe do a 5K around. There as well because you can do a couple different races with those distances. And then right now I have on my schedule, at least I've signed up for the Houston Marathon as another potential marathon to go after. I've also signed up for Austin, and I have the ability to sign up for Boston if we want. I'm not married to any one of those three as a command performance, but I do want to choose one. Probably leaning towards Houston because I've never really raced it there, and I like the speed of that course and usual weather there and so forth, but I'm open to debate on my next command performance for the marathon.

I think that it doesn't matter which you choose. There's benefits to some than others, right? Number one, you need a marathon under your belt, and we've used this in your career to great success of giving yourself what we call an 85% marathon effort performance to line us up appropriately for next level command performance kind of efforts. That really worked well. That didn't come up with that. You came up with it yourself. Can you give people a little background of what you did there?

You got your BQ, right? It happened by accident, really. I mean, Boston 2013 happened. The bomb went off. And watching that on TV from home, I said, I got to be there next year. I told my wife that evening, I said, I got to be there next year, but I didn't because I hadn't raced in that window a marathon. I didn't have a current BQ, so I had to go get one. I was training to have a command performance at BCS or at Dallas that became BCS, but needed to get a BQ before the September cutoff. And so I signed up for the Sioux Falls Marathon of all places thinking it might be cool. It was this hot there that day as it was here in Austin. And I had to go get that result, which for me was about 85%. I ran a three-hour race to get my BQ with a comfortable sort of registration window. And at the time, didn't really think of it as a grand plan thing. It was just like, I just need to do this because I want to be there in 2014 for everybody, right? But it turned out to be a great building block.

Yeah, it is. I think that that 85% effort is something, I don't know where I got it from or who I stole it from because I didn't certainly come up with it myself. But I'd already known that as a basic training principle that was important and essential to utilize occasionally where you needed it. But after your experience of doing that, I decided that something that's super valuable and many of the sort of race prep workouts that I line up for people are based on that kind of principle. If I can't get them to sign up for a race, it works. But the point I was making is that when you do sign up for something, it could be that Houston could be an effective opportunity to do that depending on where our fitness shows. Because this is the other thing people don't, that we haven't talked about yet, that's so crucial. You can set a command performance, but unless it's the Olympic Trials or the Olympic Games, it's a moving target, or the Boston Marathon. It's a moving target. It's always a moving target. It's not, and if you don't treat it as a moving target, you're crazy. And at some point in time, I stopped coaching those athletes who don't treat it as a moving target. Because it's process based, and you have to just take what's given to you at the moment that you're given to you when you're in training. And knowing when you're, knowing where and when to race, and how and when to give a good effort. I mean, basically, at this point in time, let's just talk brass tacks. You spent X number of dollars to sign up for the Houston Marathon. You're not gonna get those money. Those dollars are not coming back to you. So why would we miss an opportunity to take advantage of that if we had it, right? So I'm not saying that you don't make it, a race that you get ready for, but you look at, you're smart. You chose a couple of races and said, there's a lot of variability here. We'll see what happens and maybe we can utilize these things to get where we need to be. Let's just wait and see. We got a lot of stuff to figure out with you. You still have one more cut to get on you before we even get to this point, right? So first is, I'm with you on terms of what it'll take. Let's get a little clearer on what you said with strength perspective, because we're gonna need to actually cover this as an entire series probably in this podcast. I hate the word strength training, because it makes people think that they're supposed to do bench presses. It's not critical of you, it's just critical of the term. And I don't like cross training, because cross training is something people do when they're injured. The real term is supplemental training. It is the thing that makes you into the real runner you wanna be. And supplemental training falls into a wide variety of things. And I think mental training is actually a form of supplemental training. But one of the key parts of supplemental training that you need to work on is getting back to being sure that you're neurologically, neuromuscularly, and in the patterning of the muscle groups that you have, that they're, number one, working for you in the challenges that running 26.2 miles create, and number two, that they're ensured to be able to get you ready for any other little thing that might happen, which means you've got to do all the things that make you able to play a little game of soccer, or a game of pickup basketball, a little breach volleyball, or grabbing your kid when he falls down on the, you know, I don't know how many marathoners I've worked with who said, I stepped off a curb and I was injured for six months. Well, that's not doing any supplemental training. I mean, it makes sense when you trip and fall on a trail and you hit your elbow, you break it. I'm sorry, I'm gonna still try to figure out a way to get you out on the trails, because I think it's the best supplemental training you can ever do. I might not win that battle, but anyway.

We'll see.

It's another version of supplemental training. It's like getting all those sagittal planes and those cross purposes worked so that you're able to be as good an athlete as you can without sacrificing focused intent on Tuesday, Thursday, Saturday as when we do our main training sessions. So supplemental training is going to be key to you. It's key for you no matter what. Because of your athletic background, those who are more athletic, formerly, have much more need for this supplemental training because it has been what has got you to the place where you had the successes you had when you were 24. And so as you age, you need to continue to work those things much more. What supplemental training is, we can talk a lot more about that at other times, but it is this giant sort of mushroom underneath which all these other things that happen besides how many miles a week you run, how much quality you're doing at the 10K pace or 5K pace or marathon pace or half marathon pace. And it's a really crucial and important thing. And for you, yes, I'll circle back to basics, supplemental training, and I'm going to repeat and add as your coach to say, continue to put 5K focus in the cycle, not in the summer when we do our mileage base, but as we get into, you know, you did this a couple years ago, where you did the distance challenge. You ran the 80s 8K. It's a great way to check yourself. You jump into another, and 5K is not the exact distance, but 5K, it is, but you can play around with it. Just jump, do some workouts, and then jump into some races that don't mean anything, that are just grab assing and having fun, that don't have a competitive thing, other than this, the competitive thing that sort of gets you up in the morning anyway. Because there are going to be great checks and great ways for you to look at yourself in the mirror with a pretty bright light on to say, where are my blemishes and how close am I to getting where I need to be? And you're a guy who can take Frank in brutal honesty. That's another thing, many of the athletes, I'm having a much more concrete and critical discussion with you about where we're at, because that's the way that you handle information and you deal best with it. There are other athletes that I work with that I lie through my teeth straight up and tell them that they're amazing or I tell them that they're terrible, neither of which I necessarily mean, but because I'm trying to get them to take this meeting that we're doing into some sort of key takeaways where they can sort of move forward. So a couple of other key things that are really important here, Chris. Weekly mileage, goal, your sweet spot, as we've talked about many times, this is crucial in any buildup phase. Where do you think that's going to sit in this cycle if other things don't change?

So when I broke myself leading into Boston, I was doing 80-ish miles a week in that final 10 weeks. I think that was too much in the context of everything else that was going on. So I should have done that the first 10 weeks of the build and backed up to 70, 75 for the final 10 weeks, right? So I kind of had it out of order at the time, which wasn't the thing that sent me over the edge, but it was probably a contributor. And you know me, I'm good about running easy, so it's not necessarily about the paces I'm running, but there was too much volume combined with intensity probably at the same time, along with vitamin deficiencies and other things coming together that broke me. But I do think that 80-85 range is probably where I need to be to get the right aerobic foundation, because I spent some time there when I was in my mid-20s training. I've been there a few times training with Rogue, 10 weeks or so last year, but I haven't spent a lot of time there. And watching Allison do what she does, it's obvious to me that a big part of her progression is just that consistent 100 miles a week. I can't do 100 miles a week, but I know I can do 80. I've done 100 mile a week. I've done a 90 mile a week. Physically, I think I can handle it if I don't have the same intensity. So I think in the base period, I would want to build to that 80 range, 80, 85, hold it there for however long you think I should, and then come down a little bit as we start to refine.

So we'll, again, a mileage sweet spot. You guys have heard us talk about Coach Vigil's 100 miles a week threshold, but Chris, I would never recommend to run 100 miles a week because his work-life balance won't allow it. So it makes no sense to try to put that in. Allison has now spent somewhere in the line of 8 to 10 years developing this sort of day-to-day structural balance within her work-life and everything else to ensure that that happens. She doesn't have three kids. She is on the road a lot. She's got a lot of other things, but she's also been doing it for so long that that is her sweet spot and she knows it. And as a coach, I had recently had some athletes ask me about Team Rogue recently, and they said, so do you talk about nutrition? Race nutrition. I don't talk about your day-to-day nutrition. Why? Because you pay me $105 a month, and that doesn't... A nutritionist, you pay $105 for one session. Go talk to a nutritionist, because they're better at it than I am. But the key thing is that they also asked me this other crucial question, which is, do you write individualized training programs? And, you know, we flirt with this a lot. And a lot of people... And the way that people want to talk about it is that some kind of idea that individualized training plans are the best. I have not seen that played out in any scenario in my coaching career ever. I think a plan that's dialed in to the idiosyncrasies that Chris McClung has done in a group environment that where Chris and I can look across the table at each other or have a discussion at any given point in time, where the trust level is at the level that it needs to be, where he can say to me, I don't think you're giving me what I need, and I don't think I'm getting what I need, or I'm hurting where I'm hurting and why am I hurting here, allows me to then create the individualization with the one-on-one athlete where I needed to. But if I created a plan for Chris McClung that was nine months out, designed for you individually throughout the process, that doesn't make any sense to me. I cannot even conceive of a scenario where that could be successful for people. So I'm not railing against individualized training. I'm just saying I don't see the context in which it helps, because that means you're going to be doing a lot of runs all by yourself. And we've talked about this, Chris. Group training is magic. And it lifts you to another level. So what I say is let's keep that idea of where is your, where are you, within the context, sometimes you want to be one of many, and other times you want to be the one. And let's just ensure, as in our athlete coach relationship, that when you need Chris the one, that you tap me on the shoulder and you let me know that that's what you need. Because you know me as a coach, you know I'll get there. I'll get there pretty quick. But I'm not going to be there at 5.30 in the morning with 45 other people around us. So we've got to watch how that plays out and where that goes. And so, yes, you're individually coached. But you're coached in a group training environment. So let's keep that in mind on how we're going to move forward consistently. That means early on, you're going to need more touches. Later on, at the very end of the cycle, you're going to need more touches. But in between, you're going to have a lot of room to roam. Just don't hang yourself with that extra rope.

You know I won't.

I know. You won't, but others might.

So summarizing and kind of pulling this together, current training block focused on Run for the Water, November 5th, command performance.

No, first, mileage base.

No, no, I know. I'm backing up for a minute. So that kind of being the short-term goal, beyond that, we're not going to worry too much. There's a marathon on the other side of it somewhere.

I'll be frank with you. I don't have a goal for 60 minutes, sub-60 minutes for Run for the Water, because I already know I can get it in my sleep. So I don't even want to think about it. Like, I don't even want to go there. You can. You can go there as long as you want to. But just so you know, I don't care. You already are so there that if you just give me the last two weeks to get you ready for it, I can get you ready for it. So I'm not worried about that. What I'm mostly worried about is how do we get you back? And I guess that's it, right? So in a sense, you're right. That's it. You know you're back.

That's the signpost for me. I understand that even in my head, I know that it's it doesn't make my sphincter pucker to talk about sub 60 at Run for the Water, but that is a milestone that I can build to. And you know, my magic in running comes from my aerobic base. As you talked about, I can beat people that are faster than me in races because of that. So I need the time to develop that. It's like I'm not going to turn a light switch and then tomorrow be able to go out and run, you know, sub 60. So we've got to kind of layer the cake. And so to me, that will be the icing for this period where we start to rebuild the cake.

Just be sure we don't get in a hurry. We can extend our base cycle as long as we need to get there because we don't really have a command performance right now. You've got a Houston, you've got an Austin, you've got a Boston potentialities, so we don't have to go there too soon.

If I have a massive base on three weeks or four weeks of sharpening, I could probably break 60.

I think you could do it on zero weeks of sharpening, but we're not going to go there. We'll just see where that lines up.

So that's a milestone. Backing up from there, it's... Well, that kind of answered my question, because part of it was, is there any race-specific training for that race? And what you're saying is, maybe, maybe not.

You're going to get it anyway in Team Rogue. You're going to get it anyway in Team Rogue because the way we're going to line this up is we're going to go... This summer, we have two basic tracks we've got folks on, right? We've got a speed-based track, which is going to be lower volume, a little bit of turnover, going to have some fun with some 5K and 10K work in a way that I don't do with marathoners normally, because if I do it when they're in their main marathon training, they can get hurt. So they're going to do lower volume, maybe 10% to 15% lower volume than they do, but they're not going to worry about it, because they're going to get some wheels, and we're going to work on what we've talked about many times, is getting better economy. We're going to have fun with it. We're going to do some painful lactate bomb workouts, or we're going to do some other things. We're going to have fun with it. But the other track that folks are going to be on is the mileage track, and that's going to be one quality workout a week, consistently designed around continuing to tap at each of the energy systems necessary to stay in touch with the things that we need to, but we're really going to be looking at what's my weekly mileage point, what's my monthly mileage point, what's my mileage point during the summer, and you'll follow that cycle through. Then when we go into August or September, as we switch depending on how other people are getting ready, and the group that Chris trains in, we have a huge number of people getting ready for one key race called California International Marathon. It's the first weekend in December. And anybody not doing that cycle is in a big challenge, because anybody that knows me as a coach, they know I go where the energy goes, and if I've got that many people trying to have big races on that day, that means there's going to be some really big races that day, and a lot of my energy is going to go there. So you're going to have to keep in mind, if you run a race at Houston or Austin or Boston, that you're just going to have to keep in play. But what you're going to do is do some basic fundamental training in that timeframe, which will hit a number of the physiological places that you need to, while again seeing, is your sweet spot higher than 70, from a mileage perspective, or is it 75? Or could we actually squeeze it to 80? Because if we could get it to 80, and you could sustain that on a day-to-day basis, weekly basis, with two weeks up, one week down, two weeks up, one week down, the volume that you'll get at your next command performance will be balanced with another 100, 150, 200 miles in that window, that is a huge... For an aerobic monster, you're just layering on strengths, and you're making it stronger and stronger and stronger. Which, to repeat where we went with Allison, that's why Allison had this... She did the work that she needed to before the trials, and she had this bump, but she didn't have a race to prove that she'd had it. She kept doing that volume and volume and volume because she's an aerobic monster, and bam, if it didn't give her much... Literally, you want to... Why I don't care about run for the water? Look what we did with Allison. Two 10K workouts, one 5K workout, put her bell on it, and she just PR'd. Like, I'm not a genius as a coach. There's no way I'm saying that. I'm just saying the athlete was ready. And so, it's that body of work that continuously stays there. So, anyway.

So, the build to that is base. Build it. You know, I'm gonna give myself five to six weeks to kind of build to that point. Hold it. Do some of those quality workouts here and there to sprinkle in the speed. And then we can talk in more detail on the supplemental training that goes with that to keep me strong. And I'm also talking about mobility.

Yes.

You know, keeping everything working, especially ankles and hips and things like that. So, and then beyond that, we'll let the story write itself, knowing that there's another marathon, but we won't.

We know your command. We know what your statement of purpose is. So we're not going to be, we're not going to be diverted from what we're trying to get accomplished. We're going sub 240, period. Where we do it, who the hell cares? We're going to get it done. And you, unlike Allison or other athletes who might be trying to get ready for an Olympic trials or get a qualifier, you don't have any of those challenges. So you really get to pick your point. You really get to point it out. And you also have the ability to sort of play six to eight weeks prior, six to eight weeks after, and mess with it a little bit to get to where you need to be. So as long as we've got our statement of purpose, again, folks, if we can't say it enough, when you know your statement of purpose, nearly every other thing falls into place. And you don't have a question about where you're going. You don't wonder what the path is to success. You just know that that's where you want to be, and then things take over. You train consistently, you follow basic sound fundamental principles, and you get there. It's gonna happen. So we don't have to say it's here. Because now one thing to tell people is that's because Chris is a seasoned, long-term athlete who's raced at every level, I mean, raced at every marathon around that's of quality marathon. I mean, you haven't run some of the key ones, but you might choose to do a Tokyo or a Berlin or a Rotterdam or something else, as some of my athletes have, occasionally where it might fit. But you don't need that special, you're gonna pick your race on a special day and make it happen, whereas some other athletes, like those athletes going for big trials qualifiers and those other things, they're a lot more circumscribed in terms of the window, and so I have to press them a little bit. Another thing that happens with a lot of our beginner runners or just sub-elite level runners, they want to get their BQ, and so we run up against the September numbers, and we've run up against the each year deadline, and we run up against the stupid what is the actual time for the year deadline, and so there's other things we have to play in. But you're really in a nice, flexible space to eventually pick your place. And how long does it take to get ready for a marathon? If you're doing fundamental training?

Three weeks, according to Alison.

Well, I'd say six to eight. I think Alison's running 100-plus miles a week.

But your point is a good one, and one that is a good reminder for me that I don't have to rush it. That if you focus on the process, the result will come.

And your age is worrying you. I don't think age is really a worry until you reach about 45. I think at 45 is when you're going to start noticing the effects of age. I'm not denying that. You're going to know that you need a little more recovery and you need to eat a little differently and you need to take care of your body a little bit more in a different way. But I also think that your lifestyle as your goal and your idea of what your purpose is starts to get more and more aligned. I've watched in you over the last two to three years. The level of commitment to the little details in you have come along because your goal has gotten bigger and bigger. And as you've gotten closer and closer to the goal, you realized how important each of those little individual things are, and so you start to take care of them. And a coach, you know, at the collegiate, at the pre-collegiate, at the high school level and at the collegiate level, the coach has to do those things for their athletes. In my experience as a post-collegiate coach, I can't do that for them. Because they're grownups. They're adults. And I can't do it for you, and I won't do it for you. So you've got to figure it out, and when you do, then I'm even more effective. Like now you've got, because I can't make you do those things, and if I try to make you do those things, you're never going to feel like you got done the things that you needed to do, so you always feel like you're at a deficit. So you have to be in that position to get there. And when you get there, you're ready. You know? I mean, it's the old story about anybody that's going to be great at anything. They have to go through their matriculation phase. They have to go through where you're working on the craft. And once you've worked on the craft enough, and you've watched, I'm not saying I'm a master, but you've watched other athletes, in this case, Allison was your master, like a master craftsman, you saw she has ups and downs, she has strengths and weaknesses, she knows the things she has to work on, and she does them. She doesn't talk about it. Those aren't the magical things. That's just like brushing your teeth. Why you brush your teeth? Because you don't want your breath to stink, right? Not that you necessarily want to keep your teeth in your mouth. It's like you've got other reasons for doing it. And Allison's doing those things, she's doing it because that's what it takes to be the person and the athlete that she wants to be, and you're in that space. So, anyway.

So, do we have it? Is that it? What are we missing?

Nothing. The only thing that we're missing in, that missing, that the athletes won't, that the listeners won't get to hear is the next two conversations you and I have, which is where are we at and how far are you from getting on the path. A great coach at the Dallas Metroplex area who is a huge Lyddiard fan. I'm blanking on his name right now. He's the coach of all the high school kids up there. Sorry, I'm blanking on your name, but he used this Lyddiard principle basically is you got to be fit enough to train. And what I'm going to be asking you repeatedly, Terry Jessup, excuse me, Terry Jessup is who said that. What I'm going to ask you repeatedly over the next three to six weeks is are you fit enough to train? Are you fit enough to even get in the space where we can do that? We know you've got a few other challenges to jump over here personally, that you've got another little surgery that has to be managed that's probably going to take care of itself, and then you're going to have to get those initial base miles going on, and how long is it going to take us to be in that place where we're fit enough to train? And by me asking you that, that doesn't mean you're not going to be at Team Rogue Workouts, it doesn't mean that you're not going to be doing the things that need to be done, it's just that you know that getting ready for, in this case, this little 10-miler that we're talking about, Well, is that's when you're starting to get ready for that, that's when you're fit enough to really start doing the work to get there. And so that's one thing that we need to tell people is, you're not fit enough to train when you decide that you want to do something. You're fit enough to train when you've done the workload necessary and the supplemental training necessary to put yourself in a position to take the stresses on your body of combining volume at an appropriate level and quality at an appropriate level in the appropriate balance for you as an athlete and for the group that you're in to get towards the things that you want to accomplish. So there's a lot of little base stuff that people might not hear that the coach and athlete do. But in the one-on-one session, no, we hit the main points. We know why you're doing it. We know what you want. We know the things that you have, challenges that you have, and the strengths that you have to get yourself there. And we talked around a whole lot of other little things that are supplementary to that that are my little ways of asking my athlete, are you sure? Are you full of shit? Do you really want the thing that you want? And one of the reasons why you and I haven't had many of these one-on-ones is that we get to see each other pretty consistently, and we get to talk about them. You give me great updates on a consistent basis. And number two, and so I see you, and my intuitive strengths are played out really well, because I'm feeling when you're down and when you're up and where things are going. But we haven't done those things also, primarily because you're really dialed in. So using you as an example can be really educational for folks to see it, but it's really important to say, Chris has his shit together, and he's really pretty far down the line on a lot of this stuff. And if I had this conversation with other folks, I might not have gone past point one or point two. And if I didn't get past them, then I'm just gonna go straight to strength and weaknesses. I'm gonna poke some holes underneath their boat, and I'm gonna wait to see how I have to patch it up. Eventually, I'm gonna have to take that boat, put it into harbor and fix the whole fucking bottom of the hull to get it where I need to be. But I wasn't there, and you have a seaworthy ready ship ready to go. And those things might play out a little bit differently for other athletes in a coach-athlete conversation. So that's what I would say.

Yeah, and we know, most importantly, what I have to do next. So we got to that. We know what's on the horizon race-wise, and I have a road map in my head, which I'd already kind of crafted, but I wanted to confirm. And obviously, we've course-directed it through the discussion, but that's the idea, is that you have a purpose, a goal, and then a road map.

Yeah, and one important thing is, if Chris weren't at the place that he is at, I would have actually pinned him down on a race. I wouldn't have necessarily said Houston, Austin, or Boston. I just would have said Houston, Austin, or Boston, right? But with you now, those aren't even the key things, that there is some future race, and we have enough trust in each other to know that there is one. He may not be able to put his finger on a registration button, or he might even, at this, it might be so far out that he can't register for that race. It could be New York City 2018. I mean, who knows where it is? We don't know, but we trust each other and trust the process enough to say we don't need that. But with a less experienced athlete, I'm gonna pin them down, and I'm gonna get them to give me something so I at least have a way station or a gate with which I can then move to the next thing. Whether it's success or failure, at that point won't really matter to me. It'll be more important to say, all right, are we really where we are, or are we full of shit? Are we moving down the road where we need to be? Or do you want this verbally more than you want it? In reality, your statement of purpose is a great idea, but not a true path with heart with you. So it is a little bit, there are some caveats here with this conversation that we've had that I have a model athlete I'm working with. And so I get to sound like a really good guy, even as much crap I've given you. But if I'm working with other athletes, that's why some people say, you're so mean. Well, I am because we're talking about what I think is the real nitty gritty of who you are as a human being and what you're doing. And if you're full of shit, I want to know. I don't want to work with people who are full of shit. So anyway, thanks for being a great athlete, Chris.

So yeah, hopefully that gave people some insight, kind of the window into this conversation. And maybe you learned something about me at the same time, and now you have a journey to follow along and maybe root for as I try to go after this b-hag we talked about. Wrapping this up, I wanted to cover off on some kind of summary takeaways, whether we explicitly covered them or maybe they just kind of came out of it as takeaways. But what are some tips that we can give athletes about their coach athlete relationships, whether they're with you and I or other coaches, so that they can use those to anchor those relationships? And I wrote down three as I was preparing for this, so I thought I'd mention those and you can throw in others. One, and you used the word already, trust is really important. In my opinion, as an athlete, you have to trust your coach and you have to cede a lot of decision making to them. If you're not willing to, then you should question whether or not that's the right coach for you.

Also, if you're not willing to, you will not have a great starting line experience. And the gift that a coach gives their athlete is not fitness, it is not a race plan, it is not a strategy, it is a great starting line experience. Coaches out there, if you're not doing that, you're full of shit. That's my job, is to put an athlete on a starting line feeling like they know they can do the thing that they need to do. As Alison said, she was scared to death, but she knew she could do it. I did my job, right? So that's it, that's trust, that's vulnerability, that's the willingness to be open. Anyway, I just wanted to say that, that that's so crucial. And that is why that meeting with the coach and the athlete is so important, is the athlete is asking, they are giving the coach trust. And a coach that's not willing to be person enough to hear them, they need to get a new job.

And to me, that's also different than saying, you agree with everything that the coach says, right? It's different, because it's okay to question. It's okay to ask questions. It's okay to have the dialogue and debate, especially around specifics within the context of your training, because that helps the coach understand you better, and then as a result, cater the training to you better. And so that dialogue, that friction that can happen in the relationship is important, that discussion, but you ultimately have to trust, and there are a point maybe in those friction moments where you just have to say, hey, I'm gonna listen to you because you're my coach.

And then you'll look for that play out over the line, and the good coaches get it out, you know? What I mean by that is that you'll have a subsequent workout at another time. I have many athletes who tell me when I ask them to run three times 5K, first 5K at marathon pace, second 5K at half marathon pace, next marathon, next 5K faster than that. There's a lot of people who don't have the time in their day to get that in. They don't do it, but Chris, I tried to pull that workout one time because I thought I was scaring people too much and you were like, bring it back, man. That one's gotta stay there because it is. It's important. And so, yeah, that day I'll stand there and say, do this workout and shut up and run. Like shut up and run. But that means that after that workout or someplace in time in the next three to six weeks, I'm gonna get a physiological response that, and as a good coach, I'll check back in with them and say, do you feel it now? Do you know what I was saying? And if they say, no, no, no, then I say, then we look at it and we say, maybe we need to adjust and maybe I got it wrong and I'm not hearing you right. There's other things that might be going on or there just is no trust. And then you adjust. But usually the coach will, when you do that, Chris, when you seed and say, on this day, although I don't think this is the thing I should do, I'm gonna do it anyway, you're not being so vulnerable that you're not still the master of your domain and the captain of your ship. You're still saying, you're saying to the coach, I'm gonna trust you on this, show me the money later on.

And the show me the money part is my second point, which is that the dialogue is important. We just alluded to that. You have to engage your coach, especially if you don't understand. There are times when we as coaches make decisions that have a hundred reasons behind them, and they may be even tough decisions for us. I know there are times that I'm thinking, do we do this, do we do that? Or for this athlete, should I tell him this, or should I tell him that? And ultimately, I fall on one side of that, because I use my best information and intuition to follow what I think is the best side of it. But there's always a debate in my head often, and so the athletes are guaranteed to have those same debates. And so when you have questions, when you're not sure, when you think something might not be right for you, ask the question, why are we doing this? Why is this right for me? And engage in the discussion, because it may not change what happens or what the outcome is or what workout you do, but it's gonna educate your coach about where you're coming from and it might also play into their decision because they may have been thinking about all the same things and it may actually push them a different way because you're having doubts or whatever it may be. So always engage in the discussion, not just these one-on-ones, but when you have questions or aren't sure, talk about it.

Yep, I agree. You said it perfectly.

The last point I was gonna make, which is sort of related, which is that you have to realize that your coach isn't perfect. Right?

No one who I coach doesn't think that I am perfect, that's for sure. Well, the ones that do are the ones who are in deep trouble.

Yeah, right? Exactly. Your coach isn't perfect, and they're not trying to be perfect, and coaches make mistakes. Sometimes we give athletes the wrong workout. Sometimes we tell them the wrong thing, not because we're doing something intentionally wrong, but because the coach is learning to, learning about you as an athlete, learning about their process, learning about how you respond to their process. There's so many things at work where the coach is growing in parallel to the athlete's growth, that means that you're gonna make mistakes. And this journey is one that's not you separately from your coach, or one where you're sort of subservient to your coach. It's one where you're going on this journey together. You talk about win losses, how you personally sort of write a one in the win column, and somebody gets their goal in a one in the loss column, and they don't. I think about similarly what I tell my athletes is that I'm as invested in their goals as they are. When they don't get them, I hurt like they do. And this is a journey that you're walking through together. And so as a part of that journey, your coach is learning about you, just like you're learning about them. You're growing together. You're becoming better as a team as you have accumulated experiences. And it's important to remember that, that it's a relationship that is growing. It's not something that's static or one way or that has to be perfect because all those mistakes all in the way that you make as a coach or you make as an athlete, you learn through together and then ultimately become a better team together. So that's my third takeaway.

Yeah, I'm with you. And I would just make a little refinement to that in the sense of saying, you know, the way that we've modeled in Western society, or at least in American society, the coach-athlete relationship is sort of a top-down thing, right? Which is the coach is the boss, our baseball coach, our football coach, and many of the tropes and sort of things that we've seen from those coaches is that they're the ones making all the decisions. And at the end of the day, for an athlete to have a great starting line experience, I have to make a lot of the decisions. But as a coach, I'm just as excited about watching the game play out as I am getting the result. And so I also think this is the point to all athletes is to also consider yourself as an equal in the process. The coach will need, you will want the coach to make final decisions about key things, because you want that starting line experience, because I guarantee you, any athlete that's coached themselves knows that the moment that they know that coaching yourself is the worst moment is when they're standing on a starting line, which is why I come up with that starting line experience, because I've done it myself. I just wanted to lean on somebody that I knew had an equal measure of commitment and skin in the game on the thing that I did. I didn't like my coaches who were top down, forced me into a role. And that's why I've coached all my career as you tell me what you think, you tell me where you sit. Sometimes people get grumpy with me about that, but I really want them to know that it's a relationship, as you stated, and that the coach isn't equal to the athlete. They're just the ones that has to make some crucial key decisions at key moments so you don't have to make them yourself. That's the benefit of the coach-athlete relationship. And those athletes who are doing it on their own, I don't have any easy answers for you on how you create that. It didn't work for me, but I've watched other athletes, Carmen Troncoso and Ricardo Troncoso, they're a married couple who, Carmen primarily coached herself throughout her amazing career as a post-collegiate athlete, made many, many Olympic trials. She was also one of the greatest, in my opinion, one of the best masters runners ever. She lives in our community. She was a coach of mine, and her husband was a coach of mine. That was one of the rare athletes that I saw who was able to self-coach. Now, she had a trusting sounding board that she could bounce ideas off of. That worked really well. If you don't have all those things, read your books and follow the book to the letter of the law of the T. Otherwise, find a coach. We're not here to bilk you of money. We're here to walk on a journey with you. We're here to share our lives and our experiences and our knowledge with you through your individual journey. And we take as much pleasure in that process as you do, no matter what gruff or rough exterior we put out there, no matter how much we hug you or don't hug you, we're all walking, your coaches are walking that journey with you, finding an athlete-coach relationship that makes a lot of sense, that you have trust and strength with, and you follow those three things that you just talked about, you're gonna end up in a great position. So I'm an apologist for coaches, not just because I am one, but because as a great person said one time, all teachers are teaching what they want to learn. And all coaches are coaching what they want to be coached. And I'm learning from my athletes consistently more about myself, and these command performances, these win losses, help me find out how I'm doing. And I'm blessed to have the greatest job in the world, and people pay me to help them walk down this journey. I wish everybody had that opportunity, but it's optimal for me, and it's great for me, but I want all my athletes to know that we're in a dance together, and a good dance isn't me freaking on them, right? Or them freaking on me. It's us working it together. You so.

Absolutely. Working it together. So work it together with your coaches out there. And if you don't have a coach, and you live in Austin, come talk to us. We'd be happy to at least talk about it. And if being coached here is right for you, then we'd love to have you in the Rogue community. We have over 40 coaches that coach. So if you don't like our styles, then there's one out there for you in our community. So there you go. That's the Coach-Athlete Relationship, episode 23, maybe episode 24 as well. And we're gonna wrap it there. Thanks as always for listening. You can check us out at our website, roguerunning.com. Follow us on Twitter, Instagram, Facebook, at Rogue Running, and come see us. We'll talk to you soon.