Hey everybody, welcome to episode 357 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung, here in Austin, Texas. I'm excited to be back with you on this third episode back from my hiatus. Thank you all for the well wishes and warm welcome back. I've had so many messages, and that's really, really encouraging and validating that what I'm doing here is important to all of you, and that inspires me to keep doing it. This week, I was also inspired on a solo episode because I've got a topic that I think is relevant as we prepare for more of these live coaching conversations. I really enjoyed having April on last week. I've heard good feedback from that episode. Thank you, April, for sharing your story. I've got other listeners queued up for similar conversations, but I think this conversation is important as we set context. And so we're gonna be talking about seeing the forest for the trees this week. If we use a metaphor, I think a lot of times people in their training get very focused on the details, the minutia, the trees in the forest, and have trouble backing up and seeing the big picture. And so I wanna talk about seven principles that I think are important for you to see the big picture, which will ultimately help you organize your approach and, thus, give yourself a plan to reach your full potential. So we'll get to that in just a second again. Seven things on seeing the big picture in your running journey. Before that, a couple of quick notes before we get started. One, of course, if you're interested in coming on for a live coaching conversation, please don't hesitate to send me an email. I'm starting to queue those up. My email is chris at roguerunning.com. I would love to hear a quick story about you and maybe what you might want to learn from me via email so that I can get as many of these lined up and get as much variety lined up in terms of what people are looking for so that we can create some fun and interesting content that a lot of people can relate to. Additionally, I want to remind you about the Crushing Boston virtual group that we have coming up here on December 9th. That will be starting next month just here in a couple of weeks with Coach James Dodds and Coach Cathy Casey. Cathy was on two episodes ago with me. That group is geared towards those that are racing Boston in April and that want to get involved with the virtual community using our principles to put your best foot forward to Crush Boston in April. If you're interested in that group, email coaching at roguerunning.com. That's coaching at roguerunning.com to get on our list. We'll be opening registration for that on December 2nd. And we want to get you in the queue if you're interested. So those are the quick announcements. Let's jump into my topic again. Back to the solo episode. For better or worse, I was inspired this week. And so here we go. Hope that's okay with you guys. Got seven things for you to see the forest, see the big picture versus getting focused on the trees. Cause what happens when we get to focus on the trees? Sometimes we run into them. So seven things to think about, because what I ultimately want you to do is reach your full potential. And I think that requires a big picture view first. And then certainly once you have that big picture view, then you can drill into the details and get oriented with all of the little things, the little tactics that you need, the process that you need to reach your goals. But if you don't have the big picture right, it's really hard to get the tactics right. So here we go. Seven things. Number one, you've got to have a long-term view. And the corollary to that is there are no shortcuts to reaching your full potential. You've got to have a long-term view. There are no shortcuts. Because if you do end up taking shortcuts, what ends up happening often is injury, burnout, and not reaching your full potential. So take a long-term view. It's very often that I get connected to new athletes in the sport that are really eager and excited, regardless of the age that you might start. Really eager, really excited, want to do everything tomorrow. And I appreciate that eagerness, and I appreciate that excitement. But often what happens when we're in that early stages of training is we're thinking weeks ahead, months ahead, maybe even as much as six months ahead or a year ahead. But we're not really usually thinking beyond that. And also, we're thinking, I want my goals right now. I want my goals right now. And I understand the urgency. But the problem with that kind of urgency in our sport is that as I mentioned, it can lead to injury, it can lead to burnout, it can also lead to you not reaching your long-term potential because you become too fixated on one specific outcome and therefore then are not well-rounded as a human, as an athlete. And so people get very nearsighted and they become very focused on the next week, the next month, the next few months versus thinking about it over a period that is much longer. And for context, from an aerobic development standpoint, one of the things I think that we often forget as a part of that is that aerobic development, aerobic capacity building is something that can take 10 to 15 years of consistent training in order to reach full aerobic potential. 10 to 15 years. So we're talking about a decade or more. So if you get involved in this sport and you want to get faster and continue to get faster, then you can continue to do so if you're consistent, if you work hard at it, if you're continuing to make incremental gains without overdoing it at each point, you can continue to get faster for 10, 15 years, maybe even longer if you're doing things the right way. And so this idea that I need to do everything right now, or I need to optimize the near term is very short-sighted because you're optimizing around something that isn't fully developed. And we like to use the analogy of your aerobic system being like a child. And a lot of people enter the sport as aerobic babies or as aerobic toddlers. They're really young in their aerobic development, and that's okay. And that can be true regardless of whatever age you're starting, whatever age you start this journey. If that is in your 40s or 50s or 60s and you're just getting into running, then you're an aerobic baby. You're an aerobic toddler at that point, depending on your sporting background. So the aerobic system is very, very young, even though your age might be different. And so throwing mature, adult, aerobic adult things at an aerobic baby or aerobic toddler could be very damaging. That would be like expecting a six month old to walk, expecting a 12 month old to be able to speak in full sentences. That would be like throwing a three year old into a really rigorous training program for something. And it happens all the time. You get people that are new to the sport, that are aerobic babies, aerobic toddlers, that are suddenly layering all this mileage, or suddenly doing these really rigorous, intense, high volume pace sessions. So you kind of go from 0 to 60 without taking the steps in between or taking or hitting the speeds in between. And that can be very detrimental as you can imagine. It also short circuits your development, your potential. The other thing people will do in this context is they might get into marathon running, for example, and maybe they've only done a half or a couple of halves, and they're jumping to the marathon from there, which is okay. But then they get stuck on the marathon and they're doing marathon to marathon to marathon to marathon without then also going back and developing their skills at the other distances. Because as I've talked about often on this show, the faster you can run a 5k, the faster you can run a marathon. And if you neglect that, then you're going to shorten or reduce your potential at the marathon because you're not going to be able to be as efficient as you need to be at the paces you might aspire because you haven't been working the speed on the full end of the spectrum. And that's a short-sighted approach. That's not a long-term view. So what happens is people get in a hurry to do all the things too quickly or they get in a hurry to focus on one distance or they get in a hurry to hit a goal that may or may not be anywhere near their full potential. If you think about it from a first marathon perspective, one of the things I talk to people about is the fact that your time in your first marathon matters less than how you run it. If you're able to run your first marathon with a little bit of conservativeness, therefore give yourself room to finish strong at the end and develop that muscle memory and that belief that you can run fast in miles 24 and 25 and 26 of a marathon faster than you started, that creates belief and it develops patterning. That will then allow you to take that skill set and execution ability to another marathon when you start to raise the stakes and take more risks. Because if you're consistent in the sport, the first time you run in a marathon will be a lot slower than your full potential because again, we've got 10 to 15 years of development in front of you. And so if you've only had 5 months or 6 months or a year of development, your potential is fairly limited. So what you're doing to maximize that in a race matters less again the total time. What matters is execution because ultimately that total time isn't going to matter in the grand scheme because you're going to smash that probably many times over on your second and third and fourth and fifth marathons. If you stick with it, because you're going to get better and you're going to have a bigger aerobic system. So that first time is irrelevant. It'll be a distant memory by the time you're really reaching your genetic potential. So if you're doing your first marathon or first half marathon or first 10K, don't worry so much about the total time. Worry about how you run it. Run smart, try to finish strongly, so that that creates a pattern that you can then carry to the future races, so that you know what it looks like to run a successfully executed race that then you can carry with you throughout all of your running. And if I think about my running journey from my first marathon in 2001 to my most recent PR marathon, which was in 2018, that was 17 years between my first marathon and my latest PR. So 17 years of getting better by working on the fundamentals, and that was going between the time I was 22 years old running my first marathon to the time that I was 39 years old or 38 years old, running a marathon in 2018. I was able to continue to get better because I was more or less consistent from 2001 to 2018 and beyond. And I think it's still possible for me to PR at 45 because now I'm optimizing other things beyond just aerobic capacity. That's probably maxed out for me, but I can optimize around strength training. I can optimize around other things. And so who knows, maybe I can still chase PRs. Now 23 plus years after my first marathon, more than two decades later. So this is a long term game. And I know it's hard to think that way because we want that shiny thing that's right in front of us. But I would encourage you if you're new to this sport, regardless of your age, if you're in your 20s, your 30s, your 40s, your 50s, your 60s, or hey, maybe 70 plus, if you're new to this sport, take a long term view. Don't do anything that feels urgent. Focus on the process. Focus on the fundamentals right in front of you. Don't rush. Don't think you have to do this race or that race or take shortcuts in races because you're going to run out of time, because you're not. You've got time. Build the foundation the right way. And we'll talk a little bit later about what that looks like, but take that long term view. No shortcuts. Now, from a practical standpoint, no one can plan in 20-year increments or 10-year increments or even 5-year increments. So one thing I like to encourage is people to plan at least within about 12 to 18-month increments, which is a perfect segue to my second point here, which is that progress is measured in years, not months. Progress is measured in years, not months, not weeks, not days. We always become very focused on what's right in front of us, as I've talked about. But how can we extend the focus? And as I said, it's possible to really think about it in 10- or 20-year increments or even 5-year increments. But how can we break it down into smaller increments that are long enough to give us a reasonable planning window so that we can actually map out our training in a way that's effective but still short enough to be practical and to allow us to maintain reasonable focus within a period of time. You can't focus on a goal for 5 years, but you can potentially have a blueprint that's laid out for 12 or 18 months to get you to that next milestone. So that's one thing I really want you to think about, is if you think about the next 12 to 18 months, what are the different pieces of your program? And set them up in a way that it's not by accident. And one thing I would submit as a part of that planning is that that should be a balanced, a comprehensive, and a diverse approach to racing, if you're into racing, so that you're not just doing one distance. As you know, I firmly believe that if you want to be your fastest self, really in any distance, then you need to race other distances as well. And if you're a marathoner, you have to do half marathon specific training, not just race the half, but half marathon specific training in given blocks of time. And you also have to do specific shorter distance training, 5K and 10K training, or speed tracks as I like to call it, so that you can flex that speed to ultimately take back to the marathon and be efficient over longer and longer distances. So when you're planning a 12 to 18 month window of time, I want you to be thinking about what's a block of time, 5 months where I could be focused on a marathon, what's a block of time, or 5 months where I could be focused on a specific half marathon, and what's a block of time where I could be focused, that might be 3 to 5 months, where I could be specifically focused on 5K and 10K races. Because if you can stay well-rounded as an athlete by mixing in all of those distances with specific training blocks, then it's going to make you better at all of those distances. And if you care about the marathon and that's your focus and that's your thing, then you absolutely have to prioritize doing the shorter distances. Otherwise, you're going to reach a plateau for the marathon. You're not going to be able to build beyond a certain point because you simply don't have the speed to do it. Because if you're trying to, say, run a 4-hour marathon, as I was talking with April about last week, that's a 9.09 per mile pace, then that means you need to be able to do a half marathon in 840, 845, and you need to be able to do a 10K in 820, and you need to be able to do a 5K probably faster than 8 minutes. And if you can't, then you need to work on it in order to unlock your ability to be efficient at 9.09 pace for 26.2 miles. Otherwise, your top-end speed becomes a limiter, becomes a barrier for your potential at the longer distances. So think about that in your planning. Relatedly, I also like people to, in that planning process, when you're thinking about the next 12 months or the next 18 months or even 24 months, to think about how your volume might layer and increase over time. I laid that out a little bit with April as she was thinking about her next year. But if you're going to make gains in your performance for running, you need to be consistent year-round, and you need to gradually and with measure increase your volume over time. Because the more we can run, miles matter. It's one of my first episodes ever on this show. Miles matter. The more you can run, the more consistently you can do it, especially at easy efforts, the faster you will be because you'll have more aerobic capacity to give you that power, that staying power over longer races. So you have to be incrementally increasing volume along the way, and you need to do that in a way that's safe, that doesn't cause injury. And I like to say, in general, you don't want to increase by more than about 20% from your peak mileage week in one cycle to your peak mileage week in the next cycle. This is not week to week building. This is building from cycle to cycle. So if you max out at 40 miles per week in a given cycle, then for the next cycle, I wouldn't want you to go beyond 48 miles per week as a general rule. And so you can kind of map that out along with your racing plan over the 12 to 18 month period so you can with kind of pencil, pencil in where that volume increase might come from so that you're not doing too much too soon. So I have a lot of people who want to go from 30 miles a week to 50 miles a week. And sure, there are examples of where that can work, but you have to be very, very, very, very careful. And I much prefer a more measured approach to it, more measured increases in volume, because again, we got plenty of time to build volume, plenty of time to build volume and get benefit from that volume. But if you get hurt along the way because you're doing too much too soon, then you can't be consistent because you're injured and you have to take a bigger break. And then that's going to disrupt your development. So think about your races over a 12 to 18 month window. Think about your volume building over a 12 to 18 month window. And then perhaps think about the other components you need to be working in to build and to continue to add to the tools in your toolkit. So for example, if strength is an important component that you haven't yet worked in, then think about where that might be worked in to your plan so that you can establish that routine in building strength while not in the race specific phase of training where you need to be focused more on your running or you're perhaps in the build phase or in a base phase where you can start to work that in in a light way before you get really rigorous with your run training again. So that might be something else you would map out. You might also throw vacations on there and windows of time where you're going to be doing a little bit lower volume to take a mental and physical break. All of that needs to be considered and you don't have to do it with any crazy detail, but think about it generally pencil it in. You can always change it, but that gives you a rough blueprint for your next 12 to 18 months. So you're not just subject to the whims of others or with the whims of FOMO if you're missing out, because I see a lot of people get caught up in that. But think about it in 12 to 18 month planning windows. Once you get done with a window, then think about the next chunk, because that will allow you to really think about your development in meaningful chunks of time that are going to prevent you from becoming too short-term focused. So again, progress in this sport is measured in years, not months, not weeks, not days. So plan accordingly. Okay, that's number two. Number three, know the big goal and work backwards from there to the present. Know the big goal and work backwards from there to the present. One of my favorite thought exercises in this sport as a coach is to get people to think about what their biggest goal is that they can dream about, regardless of timeline. So ignore timeline for a second. Don't think about your next race. Think about what's the biggest goal I can dream about in this sport, regardless of how long it might take you to get there. What's that big goal? Which one's most important to you? And then that becomes, once you've figured that out, that becomes true north. And then you can work backwards from there to the present and figure out what are the component parts you need to put together in order to accomplish that goal. Because it might be a certain time in the marathon, but it could be another distance or another type of goal. Or covering an ultra distance in a certain way. The sky's the limit on that, but what's the thing you want the very most? And then use that as true north as the framing for all of your decisions and planning working forward to the present. Now, the tricky part is that can sometimes be hard to define for yourself or to pick, figure out. So I do think it's helpful to have a coach who can give you some insight. But I'll give you my insight through this podcast. One is pick one thing. Pick one thing. I have these conversations often and there will be people that say, well, I want this and I want to do this. I want to run this time in the marathon and I want to do a 50K and I want to do this relay. All of those things are fine and usually they're not mutually exclusive. But you do have to pick the one that's the most important if you really want a shot at getting the one that's most important. So really take the time. And one way to frame that question is if you could only pick one, if just hypothetical situation it was you have a defined time period on this earth, you got one shot, one goal to chase, after that you're going to be gone. Just again, not to be morbid, but a thought exercise. After that, you're going to be gone. What's the one thing you would want to go get if you knew your time was limited on this earth? Think about that. Really think about that. And then circle it. And then use that as a framing for everything else, all the other decisions that you make. Now, again, it doesn't mean you can't do those other things, but it just means that they need to work into the plan to get the one most important thing. They need to be supplemental to the plan. They need to not take away from it, because usually to use an Elliot Kipchoge proverb and quote, if we chase two rabbits, you can't chase two rabbits at once. So if you're chasing two rabbits, usually you get no rabbits. So what I want you to do is chase a single rabbit, pick the most important thing, and then use that as framing for all of your planning. And then from there, you can kind of work backwards to figure out what are the components I need to build and develop in order to get that one thing. Now, the other challenge people have related to this is that often they can't dream big enough or they don't even know what's possible for them. Commonly, I run into that, and that's not anybody's fault when they're new to the sport. It's hard to know what your potential is if you don't have a reference point or if you haven't always been in it. And that's where I think it's really important, one, to not filter yourself. One, if you're dreaming, I find a lot of times people will talk themselves out of a goal or be afraid to talk about a goal because they think they're not worthy of it or they can't get there or somehow their potential isn't big enough. But usually, if you're dreaming about something, then it's likely possible for you. Because most people can't dream big enough. They don't have the context to dream big enough. I find that far more commonly than people that are dreaming too big or dreaming unrealistically. Very occasionally, I come across that. But in my 20 plus years of coaching, I could probably count on two hands the number of people that I've run into that overestimated their potential. When there are countless that underestimated their potential. So don't be afraid to dream as big as you can, to talk about it out loud, because you are worthy of it. And then find someone, a coach, a friend, a mentor who knows, who can help you understand with context and experience whether or not that's possible for you. And then likely, what they can also do is show you that maybe even more is possible. And that's one of my things as a coach. One of my things as a coach is being able to look at someone and say, hey, this is something you can do, and not only that, you can do more. And it's also a really important role for most people is to have somebody who can speak that kind of power and truth into their life. So find someone who can do that for you, who can vet and test and maybe push the things you're dreaming about, because most of us can't dream big enough. So all of this implies that we're thinking long term, really defined without timeline, and then working back to the present. And while we might then turn that into goals for races that are coming up, the goals for the races that are coming up are less important, and they also become outcomes from the process from doing the work the right way. It also puts in context where you are in that journey. So if somebody's a four-hour marathon and they want to break 330, does it matter if they run 355 on the next one? Or does it matter that they execute that race the right way, they do the training the right way, they build their aerobic foundation the right way, so that they can establish that big solid foundation, that base that's going to then position them to take the next big leap from 355 to 335 to 325 or whatever it may be. It puts in context the journey, because we're always to focus on the immediate next thing and whether or not we hit it or not, rather than thinking about am I building the big picture? Am I putting all of the individual puzzle pieces together to form the big puzzle on the box, top of the box? Okay, that's number three. Know the big goal, work backwards from there and don't get distracted by the intermediate goals. Number four, what's good for longevity is good for reaching your max potential. What's good for longevity is good for reaching your max potential. When I talk about longevity here, I'm talking about long life. Again, this is all part of taking that long term view. But if you want to be doing this sport for a long time because you enjoy it, it gives you balance, it gives you stress relief, it gives you a community that you can bond over an activity with, then I submit that you want to do it in a way that allows you to do it for a long time, that allows you to be healthy while doing it, that again, doesn't take short cuts, which will limit your potential and therefore, maybe limit your longevity because it's intense. Running a marathon is intense. By some definitions, it's probably not healthy for us to do something that intense. But if you do it the right way, I would submit that it actually is longevity promoting. And what does the right way look like in that context? It looks like a lot of the fundamental training elements that we talk about. And I'll talk about this even more as we go through this conversation. It means running a lot of volume, but mostly at super easy efforts. Easy conversational efforts that are very, very aerobic. It means incorporating strength training in a sustainable way. Because the stronger we are, the longer we live, the more we hang on to muscle mass as we age, the more we can have a fun, active, and amazing life and health span. To use Peter Tia's word or vernacular for a well lived life into your later ages. It also means getting plenty of sleep. It also means fueling well in a balanced way via Whole Foods. All of those things that we think about as core to a patient, well developed running program are also core to a long, healthy, active life. By the way, it also means giving space for recovery. It means giving space for reaching and striving for big goals while also space for backing off a little bit. And yes, maybe still running, but doing with a little bit less rigor for certain windows of time so you don't get burned out so that the body and the mind keep it all fresh and energized. And that is what some people might call seasons of life as well, where certainly during certain seasons of life, we're able to give more emphasis than others. It means having the right balance with family and career and relationships so that your running doesn't take away from what is adding to your life in those capacities. It means, as I talked with April about, letting running be what you need it to be sometimes during the hard times so that it doesn't mean that you're trying to do too much at one time because we can only run as much as we can recover from that running. And if stress is high in other ways for whatever reason, death in the family, something happening, stress at work or whatever it may be, if those things are high or impacting us and we try to force it and run through it, then not only is that not great for our running and our potential, but it's also bad for longevity. So a balanced, patient, well-executed, fundamental running plan is equally beneficial to your longevity. There was a time when I was coaching an athlete virtually who was in his, I believe 50s or 60s. And his goal was to run a certain mile time when he reached 90. His goal was about 30 years into the future. He wanted to be able to be healthy, be consistent, and run a certain mile time at 90 years old. And I thought that was just a cool perspective because it meant that he had to do all the right things right now to reach whatever potentially wanted in the near term, but also continue to make good, smart, balanced choices so that he could be healthy and strong and continue to do this thing for a really, really long time. And it's when I think we do too much too soon, we aren't balanced, we aren't focused on recovery, we're pushing through stress, and just cranking out miles and doing training without balance. That that's when we shorten our running life, and we also shorten our overall life, because we don't have that balance. Now, of course, don't get it twisted. There's certainly windows of time in the journey, they're going to look a little bit unbalanced, where you're doing a lot of volume, where you're really cranking on the workouts, and those very specific modes. That those windows are six to eight weeks building to an A-race, and they're well balanced not only within them, by appropriately easy recovery running, and by making sure you're polarizing your work enough, but they're also balanced with windows of time after your big A-race, where you're going a little bit easier, you're taking it a little bit more mellow, so you can rebuild in a smart and patient way. So balance doesn't necessarily look like every moment is balanced, or every week is balanced, but when you put it all together, there is that balance, and that's what helps you stay in the sport for a long time, and also stay alive for a long time. So that's number four. Number five, failure is a part of the process. Failure is a part of the process. Injury is also a part of that, too. So this one, I think, is difficult for people because it's easy when you get hurt or when you miss a goal to become very, very focused on that singular outcome. And while I always tell people, feel the feels, don't bury it. You know, let all of the emotion flow associated with whatever the bad thing in the sport might be or the situation that wasn't ideal for you. All that's true. But you also have to realize that every time you fail, every time you get hurt, every time something doesn't go the way you want, it is a part of the journey, a part of the process. And our trajectory is going to be nonlinear. You're not always going to see things going up and to the right. There's going to be moments where, for whatever reason, the race didn't go to plan. And maybe there was a good reason for it. Maybe the weather was terrible. Maybe it was you got sick right before. Maybe it was just a bad day. Who knows? There's going to be those moments. You're going to fail. And that failure is a part of the process. It's not a barrier or impediment to the process. It is a part of the process. It is a launch pad within the process. It's very easy when we get stuck in the trees to look at that bad race or look at that injury that took us out or look at getting sick that took us out. It's very easy to look at those things and stay focused on those things rather than being able to pull back. Think about the big picture and recognize that you're going to be able to learn from each of those opportunities and therefore be better in the next one. Therefore be better in the next one. I was talking to an athlete yesterday and we were reviewing a race that was done recently and didn't go the way this athlete wanted it to go. And that happens. And we were processing it and trying to kind of figure out why. And there weren't necessarily any really good reasons for why. So it was one of those things where after reviewing all of that stuff and thinking about the obvious issues, I always tell people, don't overthink it. Maybe it was just a bad day. And that I think it probably was in this case. And that's a bummer. But the thing that was really encouraging for me as a coach about this situation is that this athlete was so frustrated, was so angry in a sense about the outcome, that it was breeding some really good, really palpable hunger to go get the next one. And while we can mourn the loss of the goal or we can be sad about the bad day, I think in that moment, it was powerful to celebrate the hunger that came out of it. The passion that came out of it, the response that came out of it, because she was responding the exact right way. Wanted to do the work, wanted to go get the next one. And there's something to be said for that. So failure is a part of the process. Injury is a part of the process. When we get hurt, it's, I think, one of the most formative, informative, and fundamentally developing experiences we can have in the sport is to get injured. Because what does injury do? Injury reveals weakness. Injury reveals mistakes in training. Injury shows us and teaches us in ways that often we can't learn on our own. So if you have an injury pop up, and you figure out the root cause of it, and oftentimes if it's soft tissue, it's related to something in how we're moving, and maybe there's strength involved that you need to do in order to get back to full strength and get back to running again. And that ability to then go do physical therapy, get to that root cause, fix it, so that you can then be stronger going forward, be more resilient to injury going forward. Also so that you can know how you can manage those things, that specific situation when it pops up, if it pops up the next time. There's so much to be learned from injury, even the ones that take us out for a long time, because it helps us be stronger and more resilient on the other side. It is a part of the process. Every single time I've been injured, I've always walked away from that injury or come out of that injury, a stronger athlete, a stronger runner as a result of it. And I've also developed a catalog, an encyclopedia of rehab things I can do that then become prehab things that you can do. So when that little thing pops up again in its most minor form, I can prevent it or head it off at the past, so to speak, before it becomes a full blown issue, because now I know how to proactively prevent it from becoming a full blown injury. So injuries aren't fun, believe me, just like bad races, you got to mourn them. You got to let all the feelings come out, but you also got to realize in the moment that it is testing you and making you stronger, giving you more information so that you can be better on the other side. So number five in this is failure is a part of the process. Embrace it, learn from it, and move on to the next. Number six, no one workout matters in the big picture. No single run, no single day, no single workout, no single long run, no single strength session, no single day matters in the big picture. It is the accumulation of the work that matters. We become so focused on what just happened. We become so focused on the one workout. We let those bad days get us down. We think it's going to derail everything. We think it means we're not going to be ready because one bad day happened. It's just not true. It's the body of work that matters. And yes, if you don't do half the work, you're not going to get the result you want. But if you do 95% of the work, and you have good days on 80% of those, even if it's 70 or 50%, likely you're going to be in a really good spot for race day because it doesn't have to go perfectly. And why is that? Well, one reason is because the workouts are actually less important in the grand scheme if you're training for longer distance races than the easy running, than the medium long runs, than the long runs that are done at easy efforts. Those are the actual foundational things that are going to give you that massive aerobic capacity so that you can have more cylinders in your engine so that when we fine tune the engine with speed, you can really crush it. The body of work, including all those easy runs, including all those recovery runs done at easy effort, that is actually more important than the days we think are important, the sexy days, the quality days, the speed workouts, the track stuff. It's not to say those aren't important, but they're only one part of the equation. The other thing here is that as a coach, I kind of like the hard days. I kind of like the days that don't go perfectly because what happens on those days? We get to work the mental side of the sport. We get to find how resilient we are. We get to manage through the tough thing when the paces aren't coming as easily as normal. We get to fight through some of the challenges which builds that resilience that allows you the staying power late in a half marathon or late in a marathon when the going gets tough. For long run workouts especially, I love it when it doesn't go perfectly because it's a dress rehearsal for a reason. It allows you to practice all the things. It allows you to practice your pace work, but it also allows you to practice what happens when the paces get hard. And that can be as formative in training for an A race as if that workout went perfectly. If you nailed every single pace and it felt easy along the way. And that's not to say if you didn't have a challenge that you're gonna have a bad race. I'm just saying as a coach, I don't necessarily care whether it went perfectly or whether you struggled. Because both can be really formative. So remember, if your workout didn't go perfectly, if you had to cut a mile from the long run, if you miss a day because you weren't feeling great and decided to sleep it off. Those are good things. Those are a part of a training cycle. I like to say there's no such thing as a perfect cycle, in fact, because there isn't. There's always things that happen. There's always modifications. There's always stuff that comes up. But it's okay because no one day matters. It is the body of work. And by the way, that body of work extends beyond just the training cycle you're in. That body of work extends to the prior training cycle, to the prior years of work that all become formative and additive. You're building upon layers and layers of work so that by the time you get to race day, you've got a lot under your belt, not just one cycle. You've got a whole host of runs, five months of work, perhaps, that are all pointing towards one day. And none of those days really matter more than the other. So don't get too down after one bad day, one missed run, one bad workout. It's okay. You got to see the forest here, not that individual tree. That's number six. Okay, my last one here, number seven. Following the fundamentals always wins. It always beats the latest trend. That 1% that you think is going to make a difference, you saw on Instagram, the fundamentals always are more important. So don't get obsessed with the latest innovative thing you saw on Instagram or an influencer was talking to you about. Just remember that the fundamentals are what matter the most. And that's what matters over the entire trajectory of your now long-term view on your running career. And if you go back to episode 256 is a good one for my podcast where I talk about the Running Rogue way, the core training principles that we believe in. I love also episode 306 where I talk about the why behind running slow and easy. Between those two episodes, it's a pretty good synopsis of the fundamental things that matter if you want to reach your full potential in the sport. All of those things are not sexy. You may or may not see them talked about on social media or they may not be the latest it thing, but I promise you they're more important than whatever latest it thing you think is out there. So what are those things? It's about going easy most of the time. It's about building volume, more miles, gradually over time. It's about balancing stress and rest. In other words, recovery, making sure you're invested in active recovery. Movement equals blood flow equals healing. That allows you to then go do the next hard or long thing. And recovery is as important in the overall equation of your work as is the harder work itself. Because if you don't have both, you won't stay healthy to be able to do both. Periodization, making sure you're sequencing the work within a cycle, from a base phase or priming phase, to a strength phase, to a race-specific phase, to a taper. That sequence is really, really important in order to make sure that you're peaking on the day that matters. And then periodizing your cross cycles, as I've already talked about. Making sure you're working in 5K, 10K cycles periodically with half marathon cycles, with marathon cycles if you're doing that distance. You have to do all of them in order to make sure you can be best at any of them. That balance is critical. And I could go on. We'll listen back to those episodes if you want the full rundown. But I promise you, that is tried and true advice that's not going to change. Doesn't matter what the latest social media craze is or what supplement somebody tells you to take. Those things that I just talked about are going to be more important in you reaching your long term potential than the latest fad that people are talking about on social media. So, remember, that's a part of the forest. The big picture is the fundamentals. I often get the question that is, well, how am I going to be able to run marathon pace at this pace when I'm only doing that for chunks of time in training, when I'm not doing it during my long runs, because I'm going easy enough, when I'm not doing a bunch of workouts at marathon pace. People ask me that all the time and it's a good question. And one way I answer that is with this idea of a puzzle analogy. If you think about building a puzzle, a picture, and that picture is a marathon performance that you want, what is it required to build a puzzle? What's required to build a puzzle is often hundreds of individual pieces that all look a little bit different. And if you look at any one individual piece, you can't really extrapolate what the whole picture looks like. And some people get obsessed with the individual pieces, inclusive of, I want to be able to run marathon pace for 26.2 miles, so I must do marathon pace in training, right? Well, sure, but that's only one piece of the puzzle. If you want to complete the picture of the puzzle, you have to look beyond that one piece. And what are the other pieces? They're a little bit different. The other pieces look a little bit different. The other pieces are also easy long runs. At a pace that's a minute to two minutes slower than marathon pace, that allows you to build the aerobic capacity to sustain marathon pace for 26.2 miles. What's another piece of the equation? Well, it's recovery runs that fit after your long runs and your quality workouts, so that you can recover from the work that you've done, that you create that movement which promotes blood flow, which promotes healing, motion is lotion as we talk about it. Those are other pieces of the puzzle. There are workouts that by the phases that we just described vary in duration, in pace, in recovery intervals, so that you're working all these different parts of the aerobic system in all these different ways so that you add pieces to the puzzle. Again, all different pieces, but they're all important parts of the puzzle. Then there's sleep, then there's fueling, then there's perhaps strength work in your puzzle. And different types of strength work in your puzzle. But if we think about all those little activities that create the ability to get a goal marathon outcome, it's a lot of different pieces of the puzzle. And no one piece of the puzzle is more important than the other if you're wanting to build a complete picture, if you're wanting to complete the picture on the top of the box. Because if you just had all the same puzzle pieces, not only would you, would they not fit together, but you wouldn't have a coherent puzzle, a visual that you could see, that you could rely on at the end of the process. So in summary, this is like building that big puzzle. And you need all these little pieces. And if you neglect any one of those pieces, then you're going to end up with a puzzle with holes in it. And therefore, potentially not get your goal. So work on the whole puzzle. All right, we'll wrap with that imagery. But quick rundown on these seven things. One, take a long-term view. No shortcuts. Two, progress is measured in years, not months, weeks or days. Three, know the big goal. The most important thing for you and work backwards from there. Number four, what's good for longevity is good for reaching your max potential in the sport. Number five, failure is a part of the process. So is injury. Remember, learn from it. Six, no one workout matters in the big picture. And number seven, following the fundamentals always beats the latest fad, the latest trend, if you want to reach that max potential out there for you. So that's it for this episode. Hopefully now you can see the forest, the big picture versus getting too obsessed with the trees. With that, we'll wrap this one. As always, you can check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Instagram or Facebook at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.