Hey, everybody, welcome to episode 355 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung, back after a long hiatus and excited to be back on the mic as a podcaster again after a break. I think it's been since June that I released my last episode. I did not intend to have such a long break, but Had a Hectic Summer also was just frankly running out of inspiration for the podcast and didn't want to just put out content for the sake of putting out content. So I needed the break to refresh, recharge, and also to get some new inspiration to bring into the podcast so that I could create good and fresh content for you guys. So we are back and I'm excited to keep podcasting again. And I'm going to shift the content just a little bit as we head into this new era of the Running Rogue podcast in that I want to get on as many of you as audience members as I can to coach you up in real time via the podcast if you are willing. We'll talk more about that at the end of the podcast, but if you're interested in coming on the show to get your questions answered, to get coached up in real time by me and potentially some of our other coaches, then email me, chris at roguerunning.com with quick background and your questions so that I can get you scheduled and get you on because I'd love to do some just real time coaching off the cuff with you guys to really get into the application of all of the principles I've been preaching about for 350 plus episodes. So, email me again, chris at roguerunning.com. That's R-O-G-U-E, running.com, if you're interested in jumping on with me for that. For today's episode, I'm going to break this into two parts. In the first part, I'm going to reintroduce myself as a human and as a coach. And then in the second part, I'm actually bringing on Coach Cathy Casey, my coach, who's going to be starting a new program within our Rogue community, a new virtual group, all focused on getting people ready for the Boston Marathon in April. And we're going to talk about things to think about if you are prepping for Boston or any hilly course as you prepare for races that might be happening in the spring, in April and May for those doing Boston. December 1 is basically 20 weeks out from race day, so it'll be time for you guys to start going soon and getting ready. And we'll be starting a program on December 9th to get those interested ready for Boston if you want to jump in with us. So, we'll be talking about that with Cathy in the latter half. But first, wanted to reintroduce myself. Who am I and what do I believe? And we'll start with that. So I've got a list of both and we'll just kind of see where this goes. But first, I am a brother and a son. I was born in the Dallas area in 1979, which makes me 45 years old. To a mother and father that are still together, now living in the Tyler, Texas area, which is East Texas. And I've got two great parents and really proud to be their son. I'm also a brother to two other siblings, an older sister who's two and a half years older and a younger brother who's 18 months younger than me. Laurie Smiley, who's been on the podcast, is a runner that I also happened to coach and was able to get her to a Boston qualifier two years in a row. And this time, she actually gets to go race in April because she beat the buffer this time. So very, very proud of her. Love working with her as a coach. And then I have a brother who lives in the St. Louis area who is in a completely different realm of sport. He's a big power lifter, heavy lifter. So looks a lot different than I do, but is engaged in that movement practice in a different way and is doing that in St. Louis. So I'm a brother and I'm a son, first and foremost. I'm also a father and husband. I'm a father of the three kids here in Austin, Texas. I've got a 15 year old, a 13 year old, and an 11 year old sophomore, eighth grader and sixth grader. And I am proud of them. Love being involved with their stuff, their activities. They're all engaged in soccer and other activities. My oldest is a goalkeeper and competing at a very high level from that perspective. My middle plays soccer midfield mostly and is also engaged in his school football team. And then my daughter is a defender and she's also engaged in musical theater. So we've got the full field covered from a soccer perspective, but so we're so proud of them. And also, you know, in the throws of the parenting challenges of the teenage years, which is all new to us, but we're sorting it out. And I'm a husband to a wife of what will be 21 years in December. We met in college where we went to Rice University, met in organic chemistry lab of all things. And the chemistry was real. And here we are still together now, 25 years later from the time we met. And we've been married for 21 of those years. She's a doctor, a dermatologist, and is very, very good at what she does. She was born to figure out what's going on with people's skin, which is crazy to think about, but is absolutely true for her. And I was born to be a coach. So we're both doing things that we are passionate about and love and have unique skill sets for, which is really, really cool. She's also complete opposite for me in terms of personality. For those that know Myers-Briggs types, I'm an INTP. She's an ESFJ. So we were polar opposites from a personality standpoint, but that means we balance each other very, very well. And she controls my social calendar, which is probably for the best because otherwise, I might never leave my house, but I love my wife Amy, love my kids Finley, Kylan and Elena, and they are my world. I am a business owner, own Rogue Running here in Austin, Texas. That was founded actually just over 20 years ago in 2004. I was not on the original founding team. That was Steve, who was my original co-host for the first 100 episodes. His partner at the time, Ruth and Carolyn. Ruth and Steve are no longer involved with the business, but are huge parts of where we are today. And then of course, Carolyn is the glue that holds it all together still with us. She is on the ownership team as well still. And we also have James Dodds on the ownership team. So there's three of us now that own the business and run it from day to day. I got involved in 2010 and bought in to the business in 2010. So I've been with it for the last 14 years. So most of the years of the business. And it's my other child in a sense. And we run it with absolute care and passion and love. And we couldn't do it without all of our coaches that are involved in the business. We have 40 plus coaches that are involved in different ways. From our in-person groups here in Austin and Cedar Park and in the Dallas area, Dallas, Richardson, Coppell, Allen. And then we coach athletes virtually now, really all over the world. So couldn't do it without the full team, but absolutely love it. And this podcast is an extension of what we do every day with our athletes. But at the core is a business that needs the care that a business needs to keep going. And we've been doing it for 20 plus years, and it's been an absolute labor of love. So I'm a business owner. I'm also a non-profit leader. I'm heavily involved in a local non-profit called Marathon Kids that I've actually been involved with since about 2004, so about 20 years. That is a organization that started out in Austin here 30 years ago as a kids running organization. So it gets involved in kids involved in the sport at a very young age, K through fifth grade primarily. We do have some programs that now serve middle schoolers as well. Well, we get and we show kids the power of movement through running and walking program where they're running a marathon, a few laps at a time through their schools primarily so that they can show. So they can be shown that that movement is powerful for not only physical health, but also mental health and spiritual health as well as community. And so we've been, I've been helping lead that organization in various ways for 20 plus years now. I've been a volunteer, a fundraiser, a sponsor. I've been on the board. I've worked internally within the team. I've had three kids go through the program and couldn't be more excited about where we are today with we're projecting to have over 400,000 kids in the program across all 50 states. And that's 400,000 lives that will be changed by being shown the power of movement at an early age to hopefully set habits that will last a lifetime. So that's a big part of what I do in my spare time and is an absolute labor of love as well. And it just gives me the opportunity to extend the impact of running. I work with adult athletes, mostly myself and my business with Rogue, but with Marathon Kids, I get to give that to the next generation. I'm a podcaster. Started this podcast with Steve in the end of 2016. So I've been doing it for nearly eight years now. Often obviously a little bit, but mostly consistently for those eight years. And I also support Dez and Kara with their podcast. Nobody asked us with Dez and Kara. I've also worked with Kara on the Clean Sport Collective Podcast, which is no longer. And I actually started in podcasting with a dad podcast with my friend called Dads on Duty, which I don't think you can find anymore out there. But that predated my time podcasting with Rogue. So with Rogue, I'm a big believer in this medium as a way to connect with people. And it's been awesome to see the growth of the format. When I started it, you know, it was mostly a handful of hobby podcasters and certainly not that many in the running space. But now it's exploded and now you have obviously podcasts that cover all topics with all levels of people involved from those hobby podcasters to people like Doesn't Care that have their own. And it's been awesome to see the impact of the format. And I love it. I love it for us, for me, and this ability to deliver my knowledge to you as a coach. But also I love the way I get to be involved with Doesn't Care, connecting with people and inspiring people via their experiences in the sport. So it's been fun. I am also a passionate fan. I'm a passionate fan of running, certainly. Also a passionate fan of soccer, the sport I started out in and that I grew up in. And I really am a passionate fan of about almost any sport. I can get excited about almost any sport. I just love the power and ability for sport to change lives through its storylines. And when I get emotional often, it's actually in watching sport and watching the cool stories of people that have dedicated their life to something and then get the rewards of that and then inspire others by that pursuit. And so you might find me crying over the Olympics or over the US Women's National Team winning the Olympic gold as they did this year or any number of events. I am a sucker for a good storyline in sport and I'm just absolutely passionate about it. So in my spare, spare time, if I'm not doing any of the above things, then I am probably watching sport in some form or fashion. And I love it. I am a friend. I am somebody who has a close network of friends as an introvert. I have a small network of really close friends. Big network of acquaintances certainly that I've met through the sport, but those that are really closest to me as a relatively small circle, because I'm someone who would rather have a handful of really close friends versus a bunch of more casual friendships. And so that's that's how I do it. I go deep with the people really close to me, and I'm very loyal and I'm there for anybody who is close to me. And I'm there for a lot of people that aren't close to me as well. But but when I have someone in my circle, then then they get my everything. And that's just the way I operate. And I don't know how to operate differently. So to those close friends in my life, you know who you are. Love you. And glad, glad to have you. I am a runner and I'm a passionate runner. I've been doing it since 1999, doing road races since 1999. I did my first marathon in 2001 in Chicago. And I just finished my 22nd marathon in New York this past weekend, which was an amazing experience. But I've done 169 total races across all distances, including those 22 marathons, as well as 19, 5Ks, 32, 10Ks, 29 half marathons, and a whole bunch of other random distances from one mile to 20K, to 25K, to 30K, to some tries and a couple of ultras. So I've done a whole bunch of races and I've absolutely loved pushing myself in that way. For me, running has been a way to test and find my, to find and test my limits as someone who's pretty competitive and likes to compete and race himself. That's what drew me to the sport in 1999. That's in many ways what still draws me to the sport. Although I have learned to run for running sake and for community over the years, which has been an amazing way to enhance my running experience. But at the core, it's always been about finding and testing my limits. And I've been able to do that for a really long time. I ran my fastest marathon in 2018 in Houston. That was a 2.45, 36. I've been chasing that ever since in one former fashion. As some of you know my story, and I haven't necessarily given up on that. But we will see what the future holds as it relates to my running journey. I do have some questions to answer there here at the age of 45. But I've loved my journey in the sport. I started now 25 years ago, and I still love it. I still love it the same way. And finally, at least on this list, I am a coach. I am a coach through and through. I was a coach before I was a running coach, in a sense that I've always taken on captain roles when I was a soccer player to support the coaches. When I was in college, I actually coached flag football. We had a pretty fun intramural flag football system that I was involved with and coached at that level. I've always enjoyed helping people be better in sport, and not just the sport and the tactical aspects of that, but also the human sides of that. And so it was a natural extension for me to get into running coaching, which I got into essentially because I got a stress fracture training for my first marathon in 2000, and decided that that wasn't going to happen again, and therefore dug really deep into finding everything I could read on the sport and started coaching myself. And that led me on a journey to coach for the first time in a formal way in 2004, and then ultimately get involved in coaching at Rogue in 2010, where I now coach the Rogue Morning Show here in Austin, my in-person group, and I coach the Rogue Renegades, are one of our virtual groups. And of course, I coach one-on-one as well. And so I am a coach through and through, been doing it for over 20 years now as a running coach. I love it. And I believe I was for whatever reason, uniquely created and have the unique skill sets to be really good at it. And so I've I leaned into that as at some level, I feel like I have an obligation to use those skills, but I don't I don't feel that as a burden in any way. I do it because I love it and because I know it can have a massive ripple effect in people's lives. So there you go. That's me in a 15 minute or so summary. There's obviously more to it, but that's a pretty good summary, I would say. All right. Now let's talk about my beliefs. What do I believe as a running coach that really feeds everything I have done with this podcast, feeds everything that I do as a runner, as somebody who supports runners, as a business owner in the running space? First of all, I believe that everybody needs a movement practice. Everybody needs a movement practice. I think running is a great movement practice, but I also think that running isn't a movement practice for everybody. But if running isn't your thing, and that's okay, then find another movement practice that is your thing. Could be walking, could be cycling, could be swimming, could be yoga, Pilates, strength in some form, anything, playing a sport, soccer, whatever it may be. Find a way to move your body and move your body consistently, that you can really lean into and invest in and become good at, consistent at, because it is a pathway to not only a healthy, long life, but also to a balanced life, one that has a little bit less stress in it, one that allows you to balance the mental health challenges of our world. Because if you're not moving, man, it's hard to keep the mind right, that's for sure. So, that's my number one belief in all of this. And one of the reasons why I do this is that I think everybody needs a movement practice. And if you find running as your movement practice, then I'm here to help you make the most of it. I also believe that everyone is worthy of being coached. And I'm talking about running specifically now, sure, I'm sure that applies in other spaces as well. But everyone is worthy of being coached, regardless of your relative degree of fast, regardless of your level of talent, regardless of your starting point in the sport. Everyone is worthy of good coaching. And one of the things that I'm particularly passionate about as a coach myself is making sure that I give my skills and talents as with as much rigor and passion to those that might happen to start in the back of the pack, as well as to those that start in the front of the pack. You know, I've coached Olympic Trials Marathon Qualifiers all the way to 6-hour marathoners and everything in between. And I'm going to get as excited about anybody in that spectrum if that person is excited about a goal, wants to get better, isn't satisfied with the status quo, and wants to find and discover and test their limits as well. Everybody is worthy of that. And one of the frustrations I have sometimes with pockets of our sport, whether it's said explicitly or implicitly, is that there's this idea out there that some people aren't worthy of good coaching, aren't worthy of good training principles, and that's just not true. Everyone is worthy, and I'm going to get as excited about anybody in the spectrum of fast as anybody else if they're willing and excited to do the work and beat whatever their goals may be. So that's belief number two. Belief number three, relatedly, is everyone is worthy of using good, sound training principles, the same principles that are used by elite athletes. And that was the founding concept of Rogue Running, is that Steve and Ruth and Carolyn wanted to bring elite athlete training principles to the everyday runner because at the time, the training that was out there for the everyday runner was largely watered down for them. And even to this day, to some extent, it can be. But we believe, no, everybody is worthy of the same training principles that would help the fastest elite athletes. And yes, the paces might be different, the volume might be different, the way you apply it might be different or might build in a different way. But everybody is worthy of those same training principles. And if you want to go back and learn about ours, you can go back to episode 256, where I give a good overview. But all of those principles are based on the same principles that you bring to an elite athlete. And you are worthy of those principles just like anybody else. We're all human. And we all work essentially the same way in terms of what gets us faster, with obviously individual nuance. But you're worthy of it just like an elite, regardless of your starting point, regardless of where you are, regardless of your degree of fast. That's number three. Number four, which is really, really important, is that I believe in the power of running to transform lives. And that is not an overstatement. That isn't lip service. I believe that at my very core, that the idea of using this movement practice, putting one foot in front of the other, to set goals, to test yourself, to find and smash limits, unlocks things in you that then you can carry into other parts of your life. Belief in your job, strength in your relationships, balance in your mental health, inspiration for your friends and family members and those that are watching you do it. I get to see as a coach, I get to see the ripple effect of people that have said, hey, I can do more. And who allow a coach to maybe speak truth into their life that because not all of us can dream big enough, allow a coach to speak truth, to be able to then do something they never thought possible. And to see what that unlocks in their life and in their confidence and their ability to go do strong things in other parts of their life and what that unlocks in people that see them do it, that say, hey, if that person can do it, I can do it, too. The ripple effect is so massive, and that is 100% why I do what I do, because I get to see that as a coach. I get to see the bird's eye view of that ripple effect, and it is just so, so powerful. And yeah, on one hand, it's this trivial thing of putting one foot in front of the other, but when you see it in application and you see that ripple effect, then you realize that it's so much bigger than that, and that power, that magnified power of people making small decisions to do the work, to go do a hard thing, is so, so massive. That's why I'm doing this. That's why I've dedicated my life to doing it with adults, with kids, through Marathon Kids, is because of that power. And then number five, my belief is that running is only a solo sport if you want it to be. I believe in the power of running to create community, to create community bond. And I started out in running as a solo runner. Introvert liked my time alone, and that was the way I did it. And that might be where you are, and that might be okay too. But if you're willing to connect with others through the sport via groups like ours, via countless run clubs that have popped up all over this country, via social media, via connecting to people through podcasts like this, then the power and the ripple effect gets magnified. And so you don't have to do it alone. You can do it with and through others. You can create bonds that are powerful. And I would say going on a run with somebody is in our modern world of tech and devices, one of the most natural and raw ways you can connect with somebody that strips away all that fluff that we've created with the devices in our life. You can't hide and you can't be fake. You know, if you're doing a long run with somebody in the morning, you know, we start at 530 a.m. or 6 a.m. here at Rogue in the summers. And if you're going to go 10 plus miles with somebody, there are no masks in that environment and no phones either. So you're able to connect with people in ways that it's hard to do outside of those spaces these days. So I encourage you to make running a community sport for you, a team sport, and find ways to do that. You can do that through outlets like ours, whether it's done virtually or in person, or you can find a running community to connect with near you. But I promise you, the experience you have in running will only be enhanced. And sure, you might still need some solo runs now and then. I still need them as an introvert. But I promise you, you'll unlock some things for the sport for you that'll be really powerful as well. So those are my core beliefs. Everyone needs a movement practice. Everyone is worthy of a coach. Everyone is worthy of using the same principles as those of elite athletes. Running is a sport that has a power to change lives, and it's only a solo sport if you want it to be. But I encourage you to make it a community team sport, because that's where the real, real magic is. And all of those beliefs underpin the reason why I go so deep in training principles and why I've shared 350 plus episodes on how to navigate this sport and go from a white belt in the sport to a black belt, which is an analogy I've been using lately. And if you can do that, then again, it will really unlock things you never thought possible. So thanks for humoring me with this introduction and this reintroduction of my beliefs. And that will, these will all become foundational to the conversations I want to have going forward with people like you, who might be listening, who are trying to live some of these beliefs or experience some of these beliefs in ways that maybe you haven't yet. So if you're interested in being coached up by me or have your questions answered directly by me on this podcast, email me, chris at roguerunning.com. We're going to try to get as many people as we can from week to week. And we'll see where that goes. Should be a lot of fun. All right, now, we'll switch to part two of this podcast where I want to bring on one of our coaches, Coach Cathy Casey. She also happens to be my coach. And we're going to be talking about the training principles that will get you to a fast Boston and a group, a virtual group that she's going to be coaching to get people ready for Boston. So let's bring her on. Welcome Coach Cathy Casey to the show. Cathy, how's it going?

It's going great. Thanks for having me. I'm excited to be here.

Yeah, good to see you. This way, virtually, we see each other a lot of other ways too, but this is fun to get you back on the podcast. We were on the podcast way back in episode 267, so nearly 100 episodes ago. So if anybody wants a full intro on Cathy, you're going to have to go back and listen to that, which is a great episode, by the way, on speed training and how to optimize that. But we're back today to talk about preparing for Boston, because the Boston training cycles really should be starting pretty soon here in the next month or so. And we've got a special group for that, that you'll be leading virtually, which is awesome. We wanted to take some time today to talk about preparation for that. And so we'll cover things that are both general to all sort of training principles, and then specific to Boston, because you do have to prepare for a day in a unique way, because it's a tough course. Let's start, let's start with just a quick intro on you. Cathy, who are you? How long have you been doing this coaching thing?

I have been doing this coaching thing for a really long time now. I started in about, let's see, 2001. So we're coming up here on 24 years of this fun. I love it. I love helping people achieve their goals. I love helping chase down. Big dreams and seeing people achieve them. So it's definitely my passion. I started off a long time running as a competitive athlete, and then got into the coaching gig. And I've been with Rogue now. Gosh, has it been four years?

Four years, yeah.

Yeah, it's been really awesome. Yeah. So yeah, I really enjoy coaching. I love helping people. And I'm really excited about this new Boston program. So it's gonna be fun.

Yeah, and you've coached at all levels, started out your career in coaching at Southern Methodist University, coaching at the university level.

I started there as a volunteer. I worked my way up and was the head coach there for about, let's see, I was a head coach for around 16 years and 18 years there total. So it was a really fun time. We had a lot of good experiences, took people to the highest level of the sport. And now I'm coaching adults and taking them well beyond what they thought was possible. So I love it.

Yep. We love it. We love having you in our team because you're pretty much coaching for us full time, more or less here. You've got an in-person group here in Austin called, that we call Team Rogue, one of our adult competitive groups here in Austin, that meets Tuesday, Thursday mornings and Saturday mornings. And then you coach virtually one-on-one, as well. And now we're adding this new Chasing Boston group to your portfolio, which is good.

Yeah.

So I want to start this conversation by talking about fundamentals. You know, because whether you're prepping for Boston in the spring, or whether you're prepping for another distance, or trying to build to the first time at a distance, we're big on the fundamentals and making sure you don't lose sight of that part of the equation, because you can do all the other stuff. Great, but if you're not optimizing the core things, then you're going to be missing out. So I want to start by talking there. When you think about the fundamental training principles to be a better runner, be a faster runner, achieve your goals, what do you think about?

I think that first you have to lay the foundation. I always say, if you don't have a solid foundation, the house is going to crumble no matter what. So I always just like to start off with a good base building miles, easy miles where you just start and get all your mileage up, get your body ready to handle the demands of the actual training cycle. You can do that with just fartlek runs, base miles, easy stuff. Just start some strides, just start priming the system until we can build you up so we can start building the house, which we do in the more race-specific phase. So that can be just building your volume, getting it all the way to about 75% of your max, where you want to be in your race-specific phase. And then you start lifting weights, get your core, get everything kind of bulletproof your body, so that it can handle the demands once we get into the real meaty, good stuff.

Yeah, I mean, this is a good time to be talking about that, because if you're training for races in April or May, those builds really start in December, and maybe even as late as January, but you should be using this time now over the next month, month and a half, two months, to make sure you've laid that foundation, so that you can be, as we like to say, fit enough to train, fit enough to train for real for your target race, because the bigger your base, the higher the peak is another way we talk about it.

Exactly. And you just want to make sure your body is ready, just physically, mentally, and you're excited and ready to go.

And a lot of that is making sure you're doing it at easy enough efforts, most of that volume at easy enough efforts.

Absolutely.

Which I know, you coach me as well. I'm a poster child for that in your group. So talk about that part of the equation. What does it look like to run easy?

Easy runs are heart rate zones one and two. They could feel, I always get this question like, I'm going so slow, how am I gonna get these paces? But those really low, getting your body to understand how to work at those lower heart rate zones will just actually help you be a more efficient runner. You can run more miles than you ever thought you could. Because if you're always working in that gray zone, you're never really recovering. And so we just wanna bring it down, bring really easy miles into this to help lay a really good foundation. So it can be, you're a great example. I always actually use you as an example to people who tell me they cannot run slow. And I say, oh, Chris McClung can run slow. He's running a very fast marathon. So you might be running 9, 10 minute miles, 10, 30 miles, whatever that is to keep your heart rate low and just start adding on the miles. And that's what's gonna help get you a really good, strong foundation.

Yeah. And that is the key because it does allow you to stay healthy. And the thing about this early part of the cycle, if you're looking ahead to the spring, is that it's really about establishing that foundation, as you said, and staying healthy doing it. And the easier you run, the more you can actually do from a volume perspective, which then means when you do get into this specific work, you're gonna have more ammunition, so to speak, in the chamber.

Exactly. And you're not always working those high heart rate zones. So if you think of the heart as a muscle, we wanna make sure that we're working all the parts of the heart and not just this really high zone up here, where I always hear, I can't slow down, I can only run fast, but really you have to practice it and work at it. And I think this year, you've actually done a really good job of using those lower ranges, those walks, those zone ones, those zone two runs, just to really figure out how to get, work all the ranges that you have and not just zone three, four and five.

So. Okay, so foundation, that's a fundamental thing.

What else? I think once we get into the, you know, you've worked the base miles, and then we start adding on the hills, and we start priming that with just some hilly, add easy runs, but with a hilly route. We may add on, just to start priming, we may add on some strides after runs. I like to do decline strides, which is not just a flat. I like a slight decline in the road. That way, it tells the brain, it starts to remember, oh, I have to turn over again. So we've done all these long, these long, slow distance runs. And now we're gonna start adding in just little things here. So the strides, the pickups up the hill, pickups down a hill, things like that, that we can start building up to where we need to be once we start the more race-specific phase.

Can you tell me your definition of a stride and how you'd like them executed?

Strides, I like them to be building up. So I say the first stride is 60% of your max effort, 70%, 80%, 90%. So you just kind of find yourself building. So build into it, and then you should be hitting those efforts at the end of the stride. So it's just building, building, building, and then easy jog back. So it's just getting the brain to turn over. These should not be all-out sprints, but they should just be trying to figure out how to do good, solid turnover.

Short, controlled sprints is the way I like to describe them. What distance do you usually recommend on strides?

I usually recommend 100 meters, or if you don't know meters, I say a city block. Typically, city blocks are 100 meters. Or you can also go by seconds. You can do 20 seconds, 30 seconds, if you don't have a real good place to understand how far you're going, and then just jog back and do it again.

Yeah, so city block are about the length of a straightaway on a track. Even if you don't have one, you can imagine that as the distance. And doing short, controlled speed, that's allowing you to, as you said, prime the system so that it's then ready for the more rigorous work to come from a speed standpoint. Okay, so, and what would you, what word would you give to that phase of work? Would you call it priming?

I honestly, I just call it the, just the base building, the beginning stages before we get into the more specific.

Okay, so that's the continuation of base as you build in. You're not doing just easy miles.

You're adding in those. Yeah, the next phase. After we've done some easy work, we've built just that first layer, and now we're gonna start adding just little bits on top of that. So those are the strides that could just be some pickups during a run. Just re, you know, getting the neurological system to understand like how to turn over after we've done a lot of that zone one, zone two work.

So let me ask this then, when we're thinking about volume, you said get to 75% of what you think might be your peak when you're at 20 plus mile runs and at sort of max during the cycle coming. How should somebody be thinking about where their volume should be?

That's a good question because I get that a lot. And how I like to say is what works with your life, what works with a full time job, family, kids that you can sustain, you can reach your goals that you have set for yourself, but you can also, it's not over the edge where you can no longer hit your paces. You feel completely fatigued and just your body just feels worn out. We're on the edge. We've went over the edge. So I always just say, where's that? Where do we want to go? Where have you been in the past? And can we maybe up that by five miles, by 10 miles? And we work in that realm. We don't just go, you know what? I read in the book somewhere that all marathoners have to run 100 miles a week, which is great if you have the time to do that. Obviously, miles, they matter. However, where do you stay healthy at? Where's your sweet spot? And I just like to delve into that. What's realistic for your life? How can you recover? How can you hit paces? And so then we work backwards from that.

Yeah, I also think there's something here about just not being greedy with the volume. Obviously, we believe in it. It's a fundamental part of getting faster. But I think there is a temptation sometimes when somebody gets a big goal, like qualifying for Boston, preparing for their first Boston, for example, they get a little bit overeager and they think, okay, I'm going to do everything right. I'm going to amp up everything so that I can really crush it in April. And the temptation is to maybe jump too much as a result of that eagerness, that excitement versus saying, all right, you know what, I'm going to keep it maybe similar to what I was doing, but I'm going to layer in other elements like more rigorous workouts or some bigger long runs or maybe more 20 milers. So there's more than one way to flex your schedule than just ramping up mileage.

Yeah, exactly. So that's why I always like to have conversations with my athletes about it, to figure out exactly what works best for you. Well, this work, I know I can stay healthy at 70 miles a week. I know I can do this. So let's stay there, but maybe let's try to get these paces a little bit faster. Let's work on this area over here that we didn't work out in the last training cycle. So you just have to look at what, and honestly, it's what keeps you healthy and ready to get to the starting line and have the best race that you can have. So you can run all the miles, you can hit every workout, but if you've went over the edge in your training cycle and you don't show up to Boston or whatever your next race is healthy, then it didn't work. So we gotta dial it back. We gotta figure out where is that? Because I know when I coached in college, we would get to the NCAA Championship and there were 255 people on the line. Every single one of those people got there a different way, but they were all excellent at what they did. So we have to figure out what is the right thing. What you have to think about is what is right for you as a person? What is, where is your sweet spot at? And then how do we keep making that better each time we go about this? But where is your sweet spot at?

Yeah. And implied in that, as you said, is this idea that you have to be able to recover. You can only, I like to say, you can only do as much mileage as you can recover from. So for you, how do you think about recovery? And how do you coach people to make sure they're getting enough of it?

I am really big on recovery, actually. I really have tried to stress to my athletes that if I look at your files and every single run is, you know, your marathon pace is eight minute mile pace, and you're doing your recovery, you're doing your long run, all in this little tiny range here, your body's not actually recovering. So look at your heart rate. See if your heart rate is in a recovery zone. I don't care what your pace is. It could be, you know, 10, 30 miles. It could be 11 minute miles. I don't care, as long as you are actually getting recovered. And I've heard this before as, oh, I can't run that slow. I can't, I feel good. But is your body actually feeling good on the inside? So I just stress running really easy, low heart rate zones on your recovery days, and then making sure you are doing all the little things outside of your training that you can, and you have time for. But right after practice, you have, or right after your training session, foam rolls, stretch, do the little things that will help your body recover and be able to hit those harder sessions that we have during the week. Recovery is just as important as all the hard days. And if you're not doing that, it's just not going to allow your body to really be able to see what it can do on those quality sessions.

And other than sleep, which looks like you're doing nothing, everything else recovery-wise, and I like to think of sleep even as active, everything recovery-wise is active. I think oftentimes we get in this mentality that's really a myth that recovery is a passive process. Recovery is doing nothing. Recovery is sitting on the couch. And really it's not. Recovery is active running, jumping on the foam roller, fueling, refueling post-workout or long run, going to bed early. That's an active process. All of those things are active things where you're making good decisions to try to replenish the body so that it's ready to go for the next thing.

And sleep is the number one way that you can recover. So get to bed, make that a priority, especially when you're in the middle of your really heavy training cycle. That is something that just needs to be a priority. The best that you can. I know life gets in the way, but that is something that you just make time to make sure that you are recovering properly.

Yeah, people do sometimes say, well, I can't do it all, and I can't get enough sleep, or whatever it may be. I do like to remind them, as you just eluded, that there's a window that might be six weeks out from when you taper to three weeks out from the race, where you really, I mean, obviously it's important year round, but in those windows where you're in that race-specific mode, you're at your highest mileage, you're doing your toughest workouts, you're doing your biggest long runs, that's a window of time where you need to put your elbows out and protect that even more. And so it's not something you have to do year round. After the race, you can have three weeks where you're doing whatever it may be and having a little more loose life. But in those windows, where you're in that race-specific mode, it's time to really bear down.

Yeah. And that's the thing is like when you are prioritizing you, and then after the race, that's a time that I just told people that just finished a big race recently, that's a time that you give back to the people that kind of sacrificed for you when you were in that really heavy training phase. So, go on a walk with your wife, or go take your kids out, or do things that maybe you just didn't, you were trying to be a little bit more selfish on those times, but those are your times just to give back to the other people that have supported you along your journey.

Yep. Okay, another fundamental thing for us is periodizing the work, sequencing, so that you're most ready to go on the day that matters. We've talked about the base phase. How do you sequence it beyond that?

Well, we start just getting in at one, I like to do a time trial and make sure that people are training at their, once we start that, that you are training at your current paces. So, when you are training at your current paces and everything we do in this point will always try to reach you to where you wanna go. So, that way, we're not just skipping everything and saying, now, I am going to run everything because I wanna run a 245 marathon. These are now all my paces, just because I've chosen that. So, I like to train people exactly where they are and keep moving them during this training cycle when we get in the more specific stage, from current pace to goal pace. And so, everything we do is just working on where you are and keep moving you to where you want to go in that progression. So, we start off, maybe if we do pickups in a run, we'll start with easy breaks in between those. And then, as we move closer, then those easy become moderate floats in between things. Or vice versa on the track. We may be working on strength, and then as we start going into very specific and sharpening, we may take those rest breaks to completely off, so we can get your speed to where it needs to be. So...

So, strength, phase next, right? And then race specific, then taper. How would you describe... You know, you've already given a little bit of detail, but the strength phase after the base phase, give a little bit more detail on what that looks like.

On strength, we start and we just start doing hills. Those hills can be, for Boston in particular, not as much of hill sprints, but as learning how to... You know, you may start with hill runs, where you're just running easy over hills, and then that may turn into more of a steady, then it goes into... You know, we just keep progressing on paces. I also like to teach people how, in that phase, to run hills so that we are not looking at a hill going, I need to go as fast as I can up and then easy down. I like to turn them, train hills, on how we're going to do them in a race. So we just start teaching that early on and getting the muscles ready to start taking on faster efforts. But hills are the greatest way to start making sure that you're strong enough then to handle paces that we're going to hit later in the training cycle.

Yeah, Boston is full of hills. So what do you think about just getting ready for the terrain of the course? It's more or less nonstop hills, right? Up or down, starts with a big descent in mile one and rolls for 15 miles. And then you have a big descent into Newton, lower falls. And then you've got obviously the Newton climbs and then a descent to the finish. It's nonstop climbing and or descending. So, what do you do to prepare people for that?

I prepare people starting first is we also learn, I just said uphills, but we also learn how to run downhills and figuring out how to bulletproof the body through not only just through our training, but they're also you should be incorporating strength training to get the quads ready for the downhills. Because I think people only think about uphills instead of what the downhills kind of do to your quads, which then if we're strong enough, then the hills on the later part of the race aren't as big of a deal. So we want to make sure we are working both sides of the hill up and down. And then also, what else? We work in the hills, we're working uphills, so we may do some sprints up a hill, then we'll also do some sprints down a hill, just to start hardening the body so it understands both sides of the hill.

One of my favorite workouts that you have us do is continuous up and down on hills. We do it sometimes on a just straight up and down a hill, sometimes we have a loop that's hilly, but going both ways uphill, climb at a faster effort, and then downhill at marathon pace or close to it, and just keep, you just keep doing it continuously.

So that really, I think is one, it's mentally tough because it's just a continuous workout, but it's also, it teaches you just to be solid on the hills. And I think that's a really big emphasis that I want to make on this Boston training cycle is that you just need to be solid. You don't look at a hill and go, I'm gonna have, I'm gonna just sprint up this and go down. I want you to learn how to run. Just, you know, if you're 15 seconds slower going up, 15 seconds slower going down. And so you start to learn the rhythm of the hills. And those are the longer, the workouts that we do. We'll also, you know, those are tempo runs up and down hills. They're just teaching you to feel the rhythm up and down the hills. You just be solid. And that is gonna help you be able to be strong enough on the later portion of the race, when those really, the stair climb hills come at the end of the race, where you're fatigued. And so there's other workouts that we do that we'll mix in where we do hills, and then we try to, or we're solid. We do a tempo run and then do hills at the end, just to make sure that no matter what, we know we can be strong at the end of a race. Or we'll do sprints after we've done, our legs are very fatigued. We'll also do things like that, just to make sure that no matter what, you know that you are always strong at the end of the race. If you've run it, you know, smart at the beginning, where you didn't just go crazy, get sucked in with the rest of the crowd, and then have nothing left come miles 16, 17, 18, when it really matters. And so, yeah, that is a lesson that I have learned on Boston, so I learned it the hard way.

Yeah, me too. So what would you say for somebody who doesn't live in a hilly area? Obviously, we're lucky in a sense in Austin, we've got all the hills that we need to train for a course like this. What about somebody who's in Houston, for example, or another flat city?

Yeah, and that comes up a lot, because I previously lived in a flat city, and it's challenging, and you have to be a problem solver with that. So you can go to your local gym and have a treadmill, put it on an incline. You can find parking garages, you can find stadiums obviously that are not crowded, but you want to make sure that it's a safe area, but parking garages going up are great way. Any overpasses in your town, or if you have to drive a little bit, make that a priority. If you have a longer run, that's a hilly long run, drive out to an area that may have something. But there's always a hill somewhere. In Dallas, we had a hill that I would just run up and down, and then I would go flat for a little bit, then I'd run 30 minutes up and down this hill, and then go flat. That was our hill. And it wasn't the most exciting thing in the world, but it got it done for what I had to do. And so you have to find something that works for you and be creative about it, because it's not always the most obvious. I always hear it, well, I don't have hills. Oh, well, but you can also make sure that you are lifting weights and getting your body as strong as it can on the, you know, just so it can endure the hills as well.

When I lived in Houston, I would do parking garage hills, which worked just fine, but was also a little funny at times because you'd be running and a car would come by and they would be thinking you're chasing them or something. I had all sorts of funny encounters doing that, but.

But you just have to be creative with that. Yeah, even if it's, you know, stadium, stairs, things like that, just make sure that you're getting your body used to climbing and feeling that burn, getting the body strong.

The other thing you alluded to there is this idea of being able to feel the run and dial into an effort versus a pace. I think that's one of the things at Boston that's really critical is being able to not be a slave to your watch, because it's not that useful in certain sections of that course where you really, from mile to mile, it's not the same. It's not consistent, but you just have to find a rhythm and stay there and be as smooth as you can be at that rhythm. So learning to navigate effort over hills is a big part of the equation.

Exactly. And I think that that's something that you need to practice in training all the time. So I know we have these great watches that tell us all sorts of data right now, but sometimes you need to switch that data off and figure out, how is my body feeling? How is, how does my breathing sound? How do my feet sound on the ground? What is, I know exactly when I'm in my sweet spot, when my breathing sounds like this, where I feel relaxed, where I can get in this flow state. And I think that's something that we look at our watches a little bit too much, where we need to have all the cues that are going on, instead of, you know, especially when it gets hard, we're going up, we need to know like, okay, I know I can recover on this downhill. When I'm on the Newton Hills, I know if I go up, my heart rate's gonna go way up, but then I'm gonna go and I'm gonna try to float recovery on the flat part and then try to go up again. And those are things that you have to know, like, okay, I know I can hold this without a shadow of a doubt, but that comes back to practicing that every day in a training cycle. And that goes for hard workouts, recovery runs, and then especially when you are just honing in on your marathon pace, that it's like, okay, I know exactly what this feels like, no matter what, when people are passing you, when you're going up a hill, when you're going down a hill, you know that you are running your own race and you are in your sweet spot.

Yeah, it's interesting. Sometimes people will tell me, they say, well, my pace was all over the place. And I asked them, was it or was your watch all over the place? Because it might be that your pace was all over the place. But I find that most often people are actually pretty good if they just listen to their body, listen to the cues of it versus being staring at their watch. And your watch is by definition in the way GPS works, it's bouncing around because it's only connecting to it periodically to the satellite. And you're going to see your pace kind of bounce around. And that isn't a product of you bouncing around, it's a product of the watch bouncing around, but then people end up reacting to it. And then therefore they start bouncing around with it instead of just covering it or not looking at it and finding that groove.

Exactly. But that just also comes with practice and you can practice that. A track, when you have track workouts, that's a great way to practice it, is that you have every hundred meters, you can check in with yourself and then you can go, okay, I know what this feels like. Hover up your watch and then practice that rhythm again. I think it's a really good tool to have, use all of your data instead of just relying on a watch, especially once you get into a larger downtown area where your watch may not be the most accurate thing to look at.

Yep. So that's a lot on the sort of strength phase. Race specific, as you get closer to race day, what do things start to look like there?

I really like doing changing pace workouts. I think that it really helps people understand that marathon pace, it can feel easy. So we may do some pace changer workouts. We do longer marathon progression runs so that you can feel and understand that you're going to start slower. Know what that feels like, not panic, settle into your rhythm, and then finish a little bit faster, just like you would like to do on race day. We do longer tempos. We'll do something to put fatigue in your legs, still feel marathon pace, and then be able to know that you can finish strong, maybe with some faster efforts at the end of maybe either a quality workout or a long run, that you know that once you get onto that flatter stretch, for instance, in the Boston race, that you know that you still have more gears to go. So those are some things that I like to use during a very specific phase that you know. And the other thing I like to use are float recoveries. So that especially on a hilly race that you know, that even though your heart rate got up, you can still be going at a faster effort, but you're recovering actually at those faster efforts. So it's really teaching yourself how to recover while running fast.

You are the queen of float recoveries. Float recoveries, for those that don't know, are an honest effort recovery. You're not going super easy jog like normal recoveries, but you're backing off from whatever pace you're on and still on it, so to speak, but still getting a little bit of recovery. So it might be something closer to a marathon effort when you're interchanging with 5K pace or something like that. And it makes it hard because it's a continual grind of a workout, but Cathy loves that stuff.

It is, but it also teaches you that your heart rate can lower while you're still at a good effort so that when you feel stressed, that you know, like, if I back off maybe 15, 20, 30 seconds, okay, my body's recovered, and now I can start hitting my pace again. When we start feeling that kind of like, uh-oh, I'm a little bit out of control, I can still recover while running fast. So something that I really think is beneficial during a training cycle.

This is also where we're working in long run workouts. So you've got people doing 20 plus miles with pace work involved in order to really learn how to run marathon pace and sometimes faster on tired legs. So what does that look like for you?

Well, we start first with just some fast finishes where you start, you know, trying to close at a decent effort and then start working into more specific. So we'll touch on maybe six miles of marathon effort that's kind of broken up, then eight miles and 10 miles, things like that, where we just start lengthening the amount of time. And I also like to make sure that those are progressive so that people know again how to start a little bit slower. And it doesn't need to be super easy, but maybe 20, 30 seconds slower than race pace, race pace, and then understand to finish faster and learn how to progress on those paces. And then start building up those long runs, two miles a week if you're just keep adding on in the initial phases. And once you're in there, we'll do two up weeks and a down week. That way your body has a chance to recover before we hit it again. And just keep lengthening the long runs up to 22, roughly 22, sometimes 24 if you're a higher mileage person.

Got to get the miles under those legs so that you can have the same power. We also like to do simulator, at least one we'll call a simulator, or Boston Simulator Workout, where we'll do a point to point downhill course that simulates the terrain of Boston with our own brand of Newton Hills here in Austin. And that's another thing, is just trying to, on some of those long run workouts, mimic the terrain of Boston the best you can in your local area, which can be challenging, but also I think it's kind of fun to be creative and be able to pick out terrain that will match.

Map your courses out and just find places, find downhills, find things, find the hills in your city the best you can, even if it's running up and down the same road.

The same hill. The same hill. Okay. So now we're getting closer to race day. Things I start to think about now are, what about heat training for Boston? That's something that always seems to be a factor in April, and you just never know. It could be a Nor'easter, or you could be facing 70 plus degree finishing temperatures. So, and you won't likely have trained in that. So what do you tell people relative to getting ready for the weather?

So I, for heat training, if you have access to a sauna after a quality day, 10, 15 minutes sitting in a sauna after a harder day, we'll just kind of build that up over time. We'll start to allow your body to adapt. If you don't have access to that, put on all the clothes that you can have, and just try to get hot, try to get uncomfortable, so that your body starts to acclimate to just that uncomfortableness in the heat, especially the trainings over the winter, and we do what we can. Treadmills at the gym, put on a sweatshirt if you have, just any way you can kind of make yourself adapt to that heat, but also don't go over the edge. Don't sit there and you don't need to run in a sauna in 90 degrees and sweat all day, but just try to get yourself to be a little bit used to running in a little bit warmer weather, because Boston is very unpredictable. And it can change halfway. The year I did it, it was freezing cold, then somehow it got to be in the mid 70s, and then it somehow got to be freezing cold again, where I was in a coat afterwards. So you really have to prepare for all things. So making sure that you can get some heat, getting heat acclimatized is what I would suggest. I personally will go on a sauna after a quality day instead of on a recovery day, because it does kind of get your system a little bit tired after that.

Yeah, and you really, I mean, science tells us you need to start about four weeks out, do it for about three weeks, pull back a little bit that last week so you're not going in depleted of hydration and electrolytes.

Make sure that you are, again, I was gonna say hydrating, staying on top of your electrolytes, all those things while you're doing those. And again, there's no need to go over the edge, but there's also, you wanna make sure that you are prepared for all conditions out there.

Yep. Okay, and then thinking about race day in Boston, what are the executional elements that you talk about with athletes?

Boston is unique, cause it starts later. And I get this question a lot, is, well, I'm gonna be really hungry by the time I get to race day. So I, to my race start. So I wanna make sure that before that, that you've looked at, I'm gonna start at this time, and you're gonna plan your day backwards. So that could mean that, you know, when you're on that hour long bus ride that you have to take to get to the start, you may be eating your bagel or your oatmeal while you're sitting there on the bus. Plan your day according to you and what you need to do for your race. So, and that could mean sitting in Athlete's Village, you know, eating your breakfast, but do what's right for you on that. It's a crazy, it's just a different start. But the other thing you can do leading up to that is that if you are used to running at 5.30 in the morning and your body is very adapted to that, maybe shift some of your runs so you're running at the start time so that you understand what, you know, okay, my breakfast settled this way. This is what I'm gonna eat before I do this long run. So that you've planned out your whole day and your body is used to that routine. Because I know sometimes bodies don't like switching. You know, when I was at SMU, we have morning practices and switch them to the afternoon in the spring. And everyone's like, oh, I feel like this when I run at this time of day in the afternoon when your body likes routine. And so make sure that we kind of adapt in the weeks leading up to that so that we have our race day planned out. You're perfectly fine with running in the middle of the day. You know that that breakfast is going to settle at this time. I'm probably going to eat a late morning snack and just kind of do things that are right for you and you've practiced with them on a kind of a crazy different morning than we're used to running most races.

Yeah. And what about race planning strategy?

Race strategy for this race is that you need to make sure you are running your own race and not getting sucked into the craziness that is the Boston start. It is a very narrow start that is really different from most other major races that you might have run. And, you know, so you're sitting there and everybody is about your same race speed and the gun goes off and people just take off down the hill. And that is one thing you don't want to do in this race. So when you see everybody, you know, just going crazy right by you, you need to make sure that you are starting controlled, even though you're going downhill, that you're like, I've practiced this, I know what to do. And that, you know, all those people that are passing you and you're going to pass them at the end of the race. So make sure that we've started controlled. We, you know, settle into our pace and know that the roller's in the middle, that we just need to be solid on to leave something for the back half. And I always like to say on this course that as you're coming into the Wellesley area, that that's kind of where your race is going to begin, because that's when it's going to get hard. And we know if we've kept the first part of the race, very controlled, that we can really hit the second part of it. So I always just say, when you hear everyone screaming for you, do a physical reset. So shake out your arms. Just take that deep breath and know, okay, I have a 13-mile run now. And so that's kind of the way I break this course up a little bit. And then we go to the hills, we crest the hills, we're solid up the hills. We don't need to burn matches before we have gotten to the hills. We crest the hill, we go back into our rhythm, we quote, recover, and then we hit another hill. And that we know if our heart rate is spiking, that we can still recover when there's a downhill on the other side of the hills. And then once you get up Heartbreak Hill, which when I ran this for the first time, I was very concerned about Heartbreak Hill. But when I got there, I was like, oh, wait, that was it. And then it was the other ones before it that were really a little more challenging for myself personally. But once you get over there, then you have a good downhill after that. And one little pop up at the end that kind of hurts your feelings. And then the biggest thing is use the crowd on this course. Put the headphones down. And there is nothing like it. There's people five deep on all the sides of the street, or both sides of the street. And it's awesome. And one other thing on this is there's water on both sides of the street. Which I feel is, you know, you're kind of like, oh, should I go over here? Should I go over there? Before this, make sure that you know, you know, okay, I'm going to commit to this and run at the straightest line that you can because it is crowded and it's tempting to keep weaving in and out of people. Make sure that you are trying to keep the straightest line possible with the narrow streets.

Yeah. It's, it's intense, but it is all worth it. And Boylston is the best finish line in our sport from my perspective.

It is. And I don't care if you've done it, you know, it's your first time or if you're your 20th time, you still get chills. You still have all the fields coming down that last stretch. And it is epic and it just never gets old.

So yeah. So I think that's a good note to end the sort of training chat on the philosophy part of it. And now just quick notes on the group. So Crushing Boston is going to start on December 9th. For those that want to check it out or join the group, you just email coaching at roguerunning.com. Right now, that's R-O-G-U-E. Don't misspell it. Coaching at roguerunning.com. And you'll get on our list. We'll have you sign up as we get closer. But it's only about a month away as this thing posts. So it'll be here pretty soon. And then we've got, I think, 19 weeks of a program with Coach Cathy and Coach James Dodds, who is my partner in crime with my podcast training group, The Renegades. But it's going to be led by Cathy, a great virtual forum that we have to interact with your teammates that will be in this group. And you're going to all be focused on one race. So you'll get the plan you need to go crush Boston in next April and have a team and coaches that are going to be there to support. And then you can meet them in Boston as well as me, because I'll be there too next April, which is awesome. So if you're interested, email coaching at roguerunning.com. We hope you join us. And I'm excited, Cathy. Thanks for jumping on.

Thanks for having me. And it's going to be fun. I'm really excited.

All right, a few final notes as she signs off. That's a $60 a month program that will run through Boston. And then we're actually hoping to continue it on as one of our advanced virtual training groups, but we will see how that goes. If you'd like to learn more, you can email coach at roguerunning.com. You can also check out our website where there are more details. Just go to roguerunning.com and click on the train button and go to our virtual group training info tab. There's more info there if you want to check it out. Also a reminder, if you want to come on the podcast and get coached up, email me, chris at roguerunning.com. Excited to get the podcast going again and hoping to show you guys the real time application of all of these principles I've been talking about for 350 episodes by doing real time coaching with real time runners that are also listeners. So take advantage of that opportunity if you're so interested. Otherwise, I'm glad to be back. Thanks to all of you for being patient with me. Thanks to all of you for listening to this one. As always, if you'd like to learn more about us, you can check us out at rogrunning.com or follow us on Instagram or Facebook at Rogue Running. Until next week, we'll talk to you soon.