Hey, everybody, it is episode 102 now of the Running Rogue Podcast. Chris and Steve coming at you with a special guest from Austin, Texas. We're excited to have Michigan Now alum, recent breakout star in the NCAAs, and Canadian Ben Flanagan here. Welcome, Ben, to the show. Hey, Ben, how are you?

I'm doing really well, thank you. Even better now that I'm here. So I'm super, super stoked to be here in Austin, first time, and really excited to be on this podcast in particular. So thanks so much for having me. And for the listeners, thanks for listening.

It's exciting for us. We recently had an exchange on our podcast training group message board. We've got some Canadians in that group, and they were following the Canadian cross-country championships. And they said, hey, you need to get Ben Flanagan on the show. Turns out we already had you scheduled to be here, live and in person. Thanks to Reebok, your sponsor now, and the running event being in town, which is the basically running specialty trade show that comes to Austin annually. So we're fortunate that all the timing worked out, but you've already got fans out there, not just the Canadian ones, but we've also talked about your recent found with Wynn. Obviously, we talked about the viral NCAA championship win where you asked about your mom. We'll get to all of those details in a second. But we wanted to start in lieu of talking about current events where we usually start these episodes. We wanted to start just by being a fan a little bit with you. And to talk about this, first I want to talk about Canadian running, Canadian professional running. We recently covered in our intro topics the Toronto Marathon. Cam Levens had a big breakout result for him there, getting the Canadian record in the marathon that had stood for a very, very long time. So you've got him doing big things. You've got get Moa Med training with the Bowerman Track Club. He's doing big things. Nate Brandon recently retired, but he was a little bit of an OG more recently in the sport. But a lot going on in Canadian running. Recently, you guys had the Canadian Cross Country Championships. We'll get to that. But what do you think of it as a sales pitch for Canadian athletics? We talk a lot about American runners. We also give the Canadians love when we have that opportunity. But who should we be looking out for as the up and coming Canadian runners other than yourself?

Yeah, you talked a lot about some recent performances. Cam Levin's Marathon was something that was really special. And it's really cool, because these are guys that I really, really looked up to, especially at the beginning of my high school career, at the high school level, and even all through college. And to this day, I still look up to these guys. But Canadian distance running is in a really, really special spot right now, and it's really exciting to be a part of that. You know, the ones that you mentioned, Cam Levin's, Mohammed Ahmed, are doing amazing things for the sport, and Mo just keeps setting the bar higher and higher every single year on the track. And Cam just recently set the bar even higher for the marathon, you know? And I don't think it ends there. I think that Canadian record's gonna get lower and lower the more times he runs it.

I'm sure your new teammate, Justin Knight, will have some things to say about that as well, too.

Yes, yes, exactly. And then Jay Knight has been not only just, you know, an exceptional talent and really cool to follow, he's a guy that I actually ran against very early in his career at the high school scene. So kind of being able to see his progression has been phenomenal, you know, because he got into the sport pretty late. And then beyond that, you got Mike Tate and Rory Linkletter, fellow runners in NCAA runners at Southern Utah and BYU, who are the same age as Justin and I, are big up-and-comers. Luke Brachette, who just recently won cross-country championships, is another guy. He's an Olympian in Rio. So there's just so many guys, and it's cool to, you know, chase some of those standards people are setting. Those expectations are getting higher and higher, and it's also, you know, nerve-racking, but also exciting that every time you come on the line, there's another three or four other guys, besides the Muhammad Omids, the Kam Levens, the Justin Knights, that are also, you know, right there as well. So I would say the depth is getting to a place that it hasn't been a really, really long time. So the combination of just exceptional performances individually, but also the depth altogether has been really, really cool, and it keeps you honest and on your toes.

What about on the women's side? I know Melissa Bishop obviously doing amazing things at the 800-meter level. Who are some of the other Canadian females we should be looking out for?

Yeah, absolutely. Gabriela Stafford is another one, another individual who's the same age as myself, and I've been on a couple of teams with her and 1500-meter runner in particular, doing some really big things. Jamie Phelan is my high school and collegiate teammate at St. Mary's High School and the University of Michigan respectively. And I know she's training hard again and had to overcome a few injuries, but is getting back on the scene there. And then Natasha Wodock, LaLonde, our fantastic runner, Rachel Cliff. There's so many. The list goes on. But again, I think a very similar scenario, as we're seeing on the men's side, is there's these really great top-end performances, but also just a number of girls that interchangeably beat one another depending on the day, depending on the race. And I think all together that's just lifting the caliber higher and higher on the men's and women's side.

Raising the bar, LaLonde just won Canadian Cross. So as you look beyond that, as a fan of the sport first, obviously you're a runner, now a professional runner, who do you want to watch? Who would you get behind a paywall to see whether they be a professional or an NCAA athlete? Who are you a fan of first as a participant in the sport?

Yeah, absolutely. And to clarify, is this Canadian scene or generally speaking?

Generally, beyond. Yeah, world scene. It might be Canadian runner, but who are you going to pay the, whatever, flow track paywall fee or the NBC sports? Who would you pay to go out of your way to watch them race?

So I'll be honest, I'm a big running nerd. I love watching everything. There's definitely some specific individuals that I want to make sure I got a live stream going when they're touching the line. But I love just seeing competitions, anything really. Some notable names, Edward Cheserick is a guy who just dominated the NCAA scene while I was there. And anytime that guy steps on the line, he's ready to go. And he doesn't step on the line super, super often nowadays. So he's a guy that when he's out there, it's pretty exciting to see what he's going to do.

A man without a country just won Manchester Road Race on Thanksgiving. We just talked about him. King Ches on our last episode.

He's also earned the right not to run some races. He got a little over-raced in his career, as was a big issue with him at Oregon.

Yeah, I mean, 349 mile or indoors last year, he just puts on...

So let's talk about King Ches, because we've been talking about him. He's sort of a man without a country right now, sponsored by Sketchers. But sort of in limbo, is he going to be able to race for the US in Tokyo? Is he going to race for Kenya? We don't know. Is he going to get a citizenship? We know he's on that path. But what was he like as somebody down the line from you in a race? I mean, what was it like lining up with that guy?

By the way, Ben's face was just jaw-dropping.

It was like the look of fear. The look of fear, but he is a stone-cold killer on the track, right? So what was that like?

So it's pretty interesting, and I know we're going to talk a little bit more in detail about my career, but I honestly feel like I never raced him. I've been in races with Cheseric, but it's hard for me to really admit that I've ever raced him because that's just never been the case.

Because he was so far ahead of you.

Yes, he was so far ahead of me. It was a point in my career where I wasn't doing anything crazy on the national scene, and he was doing nothing but crazy things on the national scene. So our careers lining up together, we just were not on the same level. So he was a guy that was... You finish the race and you ask your coach, you're like, oh, I know Cheseric dropped me in the first mile. What did he do? What did he finish in? And then, yeah, you know, and even going further and further, he wins multiple 10K titles, and I end up winning one when he's done and graduated. So I'm excited to... Now at the level that I am now, I'm a lot more comfortable admitting that it'll be really cool to be in a race with him where I feel like I can actually be in a race with him.

Respond to a move.

Respond. Actually race Edward Cheswick as opposed to be a participant. And that's something I'm looking forward to down the road.

It's a daunting task, I know, but exciting, right?

Even Shalimo didn't respond last week.

So I'm not saying like, oh, I'm going to beat this guy, and I'm ready to go toe to toe, but he sets the bar high. Let's talk about that again. And I've only heard amazing things about him as just a general, as a person, which is pretty cool, because a guy that dominates the scene that much, I didn't know a lot about him, but I've got a lot of people who I know well who say that he's been such a pleasure to be around post-race and stuff like that, so that's pretty cool.

Okay, so Chesirek, who else would you use?

Paul Chalimo is also another one who's really excited to race on the American Distance scene. I love watching Muhammad Ahmed run. I think he is just so inspiring. The way he races, he just shows up big all the time.

What about on the women's side?

On the women's side, let me think for a second who I want to list here. Erin Finn is another collegiate teammate of mine who's really, really excited to watch because she always puts on really well. I think Danny Jones, who just recently won NCAA cross-country title.

University of Colorado.

Yeah, and I'm definitely naming a lot of people around my age, but...

Do you watch marathons?

I do.

Can you relate? Like watching New York, would you sit there and watch New York?

I would. I didn't, but I definitely... I didn't this time, but normally it's just... I conflicts with class most of the time, or like... I guess it was probably on the weekend. Or conflicts with long run, but I would definitely watch a marathon. I'd probably put it in the background and...

You're a 10K guy, so the marathon is likely in your future at some point, right?

Yeah, yeah.

I mean, you were a 10K guy from your first... I mean, your first year, your first year, your first year, you ran 10K on the track.

Yeah, I think...

Or was it your sophomore year?

I think my sophomore year. Okay, yeah. But yeah, I remember so specifically because I came off the track, my debut was at Mt. SAC. I ran 29.13, it was my first one, and I was excited. I was expecting to be pretty excited. And all my teammates were like, dude, you just screwed yourself big time. And I was like, oh my gosh, I didn't even think about that.

So true.

It worked out okay.

I made the same mistake. I made the same mistake in my career as well.

I was like, oh man, I was feeling pretty good with two laps to go. I guess I could hit the brakes, you know, maybe got another year or some miles in 5Ks.

I went down to the steeple because I was trying to avoid the 10. Yeah. I went to the steeple for a little while.

Yeah, yeah, I don't have that five foot six, you know, I don't have that privilege of dabbling with the steeple too well.

Hard to get over the hurdles.

Yeah. I got away with it in high school, but in the college scene, I don't know. I don't know about that.

The 10K is like drawing the short straw.

Yeah. No kidding. Honestly, I love the event now. I've grown a huge appreciation. I think I'm still learning a lot about it. And I think there's a lot of potential to grow. But yeah, I am a 10K guy. So I don't know if you want to talk about the marathon stuff now or later, but it's a conversation we can have.

Yeah, we will. I didn't get to that about you personally, but if I mention the name Eliud Kipchoge, what does that mean to you? Do you follow him? Are you a fan in any way of his? Or is that just too far beyond what you're thinking about right now?

I would say somewhere in the middle. I think you caught me at the right spot now where transition... When you're a student athlete, the NCAA is everything, right? And I love watching the NCAA, but now being removed from it is kind of opening my eyes to the world beyond it, right? The Eliud Kipchoge's of the world and the marathon, what it takes to run an exceptional marathon and the professional scene altogether. So I would say just in the recent months, I've really, really become a lot more interested in professional running altogether because the NCAA was just so relevant to me. So it's what I dedicated most of my time to. So I think I'm in the middle of transitioning, not necessarily away, but really starting to focus on races outside of the NCAA world. And Eliud Kipchoge is just... His performances are something that are truly unfathomable to me right now. I don't understand how he ran that fast.

When you think about the pace that he runs per mile for 26.2, it's like running that for 10K is a solid race. And he's doing it 20 more miles beyond that.

Yes. I can't even fathom. And it's not even just the moment itself. The race, obviously, it happened. He did it. But it's leading up to that. What kind of stuff was that guy doing? What can he possibly... What does his training look like to set him up for a performance like that? I couldn't imagine trying to hop in a workout with that guy, or even him trying to find a workout partner.

It's 20 years of doing the same work.

You'd be really surprised when you look at his workouts. We only get glimpses of his late... We've seen now two different cycles. The last six weeks, we've gotten some snapshots of workouts that he did over the last six weeks of his prep. And it wouldn't be incredibly impressive to you.

Interesting.

No, but that is because he's... There's a lot of hiding in there, which he does long 20, 24 mile runs, which are done at 9, 000 feet or 8, 000 feet of altitude, and they're done at paces that are five minutes to 510. And you're like, wow, that doesn't sound crazy crazy, but his track stuff is really manageable. He does a workout we do where he does Ks or 1200s or miles, and they're done at his marathon pace, basically, which is 435 to 445. And people look at that and they say, wow, Kipchoge doesn't really train that hard. It's like, well, it's deceptive, the number of years of work that he's done. But the sessions themselves are not out of this world. It's just the cumulative load of things that he does that absolutely is crazy.

20 plus years working with the same coach. In the same system, basically cranking out 115 to 220 mile weeks. Yeah, he's in it for the marathon. Year after year, right? Plus, at this point, he's an expert in the marathon. And it's not often that you get an athlete that's willing to become an expert in the marathon. There's people that kind of go back and forth sometimes, but he's the sensei of the marathon.

Yeah, and you may not, I don't know if you know this because you're a little younger, but I mean, he did get second at the World Champs or Olympics.

He won the World Champs.

He won the World Champs. He got second at the Olympics. At the 5K. So he definitely had chops.

When he was 18. So anyway, he has the history, but it's just basically consistent work for a long period of time, right?

Absolutely. And I think the only thing that really resonates with me just by watching him run, is I imagine those workouts that you're saying that may not seem super impressive, like I bet he's just totally in control, right? And that's noticeable in his marathon. It's not a grind for him. It's just like running 435 feels good. And that's something that in my training, it was a big learning experience being like, oh, you can do a workout and feel in control the whole time. And that's when the races reflect training really, really well.

That is the magic of training. There's a mythology that you have to bang your head against the wall every workout in order to get benefit and gains. But really, it's more about what you're talking about, that relaxed speed, that controlled speed, that's where you find the magic. Because for us, 10K to the marathon, it's about efficiency, really. It's not about killing yourself. And so if you can learn to be efficient in the workouts, then you can learn to be efficient in the race and that translate. One question before we switch to talking about you, more specifically, but now that you've made the transition to the pro ranks, and theoretically, you'll be lining up against guys like Mohamed, who you've looked up to as a Canadian that I'm sure you'd like to follow in his footsteps. He's more of a 5K guy right now, but I'm sure at some point we'll move up a little bit too and go back and forth. But theoretically, you could be lining up with somebody like that that you've looked up to.

Cam will probably come back down, five and 10, too.

So what does that feel like? Is that weird? Is that like, do you feel like an imposter in the context of that? Or is it sort of like game on, let's bring it. I'm excited to go line up with those people I've been fans of, a fan of.

Probably both. And you know, in general, like, you know, the level that I was racing at this summer, like that's all new to me, right? So there's a lot of, I've had a lot of those moments where it's like, wow, this is like last mile of a race in Falmouth, for example, or even NCAAs. It's like, I'm not used to running with these guys, but like, I can do it, right? And I think the Canadian scene, you know, it's not really an option. Like if I want to be as good as those guys, and then I have to approach it with like, it's game on. I can see myself running with those guys for the first time in my career. And I'm really excited about that. So I actually got the chance to race Mohamed Ahmed this past summer at the Canadian Outdoor 5K Championships. And you know, that was a moment where it's just like, you know, I went into it, like knowing what to expect in the caliber he was at, and you know, I was like, okay, I want to compete with him. I don't think we're there yet, right? Where it's like, yeah, you know, I can, I'm gonna beat this guy today, but it's like, I feel like I can run with him. And it was a different, very, very tactical racing. Last lap, you know, he closed in 54 point, but it was cool, right? It was cool to be with him with 200 meters to go, right? That's something I never had. So I think it's definitely trusting the process on the way there. So it's like, that was a good incremental step towards, you know, eventually competing with them. And, you know, one day, hopefully, you know, I can feel like I'm ready to challenge those guys and compete with them on any given day. But I think it's just kind of accepting where we're in the process right now. And we're closer than we've ever been before. And now it's just getting closer and closer from this point on.

Yeah, so let's dig into that kind of mindset because you had an amazing summer, obviously. We'll kind of start with the big breakout event, right? You won NCAAs in the 10K Outdoors. As somebody who came in as an underdog, or at least somebody that people weren't talking about as a favorite to win the race. You fly by Vincent Kiprop at the end. You finish and you ask, where's my mom? The video goes viral. And you had this big result, but the making of that result had to start somewhere with you believing that it was possible, but you weren't somebody that anybody, at least externally was saying, hey, Ben can win this. So that had to come from yourself, from within, from your team, your coach. So talk about that mindset going into that race. Did you think you could win and what allowed you to have that breakthrough?

Yeah, I think that's a really great question. And there's definitely a few ways to answer it. And I think a lot of my career, I was like going into races that I have always had really high expectations, really high goals. I'm a bit of a dreamer. And when performances fell short of those accomplishments, which let's be honest, it was a lot of my collegiate career, I had very high expectations coming out of high school. I was always like wondering how I could improve my confidence. Like I thought like, I was like, oh, I gotta be more confident, more confident. It was something that I was trying to just kind of force. Whereas this summer was the first time we're like entering these races. It wasn't about just like a deliberate change in mindset. It was just like, I had the evidence and it made sense to me that I could compete at that level. And that came from a variety of factors. I think training was a big part of it. Coach Sullivan and I definitely changed some things that I think really boosted my strengths and addressed some of my weaknesses in racing. And my teammates were incredibly helpful and inspiring. And my favorite story really about the NCAA Championships is the morning of the race, I went up to Coach Sullivan with a cup of coffee, and it was probably hours before the race even went. And everyone was super excited because we knew I was under the radar and we knew I was due for a big performance, but we didn't really have a true indication of what that meant or what the quantitative value of that was. And I kinda had to address that elephant in the room, so I told Kevin, I was like, Coach Sullivan, I feel like I can actually win this. And that was a moment where I was expecting him to just be like, ah. Yeah, right, he's like, I've won NCAAs, I know what it takes, that's what I was expecting, cause in the same situation that everyone else was feeling, it's like, I've never won NCAAs, I'm not expected to win. Am I delusional for thinking that I can? So I had to bring it up, and one of the most inspirational things of that meet and one of the most motivating factors is he said, yeah, I think you can win. And that was like, oh my gosh, it's game on, let's do this thing, right? And we approached the race very, very meticulously. What we wanted to do, the strategy was very purposeful. And honestly, it was one of those days where everyone, runner can relate to, on both sides of it, they can relate where everything just doesn't go right. And those amazing days where everything just comes together perfectly, it was a really special moment for me. And that race itself boosted my confidence even further, and I think was super motivating heading into the rest of the summer as well.

You also had, as we talked about a little bit earlier, you had an up and down career at Michigan, but you had a lot of successes at the conference level, which a lot of people don't really, I coached collegiately and ran collegiately. So I know that if you've won a conference championship, especially in a conference like the Big Ten, which is a really good conference, especially at the long, at the distances, you know you've got something, right? And you'd won and competed high, at a really high level there. You just hadn't competed quite, I think 14th was your best performance on the track, right? And 20th in Cross, something around there, right?

Yeah, that's exactly right.

So you'd been to the big show, you'd been at the big show every year in Cross, which is crucial, but you had a really rough indoor season your senior year, it seemed like. So tell us a little bit about what went on that season. You had a great 20th place performance at the NCAA Championships in Cross Country. Were you happy with that result? Was that what you expected, or were you disappointed with the way your Cross season ended in your final year?

Through the roof excited. So the moment I wanted to be 40th that day, and I was like, I think I can be 40th, because there was a lot of days I wanted to be 40th, and I wasn't close. I was like, this is the year I'm All-American, 64th. I was like, okay, this is the year I'm All-American, 83rd. I was like, dang, this meet is so hard. NCAA Cross Country is a hard meet. So I was like, this year, be humble. I'm in the best shape I've ever been in, but we can be 40th, because that's what it takes. And with 800 meters to go, I was in 20th, and I was like, holy, I cannot believe I'm gonna be 20th in this meet. So that was a major, major breakthrough for me. I was so excited, hands down, at the moment was the best race of my life. And also the hardest, that thing hurts so bad. So yeah, it was like, okay, you know what? I'm an All-American now. First time, first team All-American, and that was a big deal for me. I was like, okay, I can compete with these guys. And I wasn't in the lead group. I didn't come top 10. And I was like, maybe I can, that's the next step. But the guys, from 20th to 40th, I was like, this is a new group of athletes that I feel-

You belong.

I belong.

You belong in that group. So how did you leapfrog that into your senior indoor track season? Because that's a lot of time to think about being in a next level, right? Were you thinking at that point, oh, I wanna go down to the elite, the elite? Or were you like, let's just be solid, get an All-American in track? Because that's also a big jump, right?

I would say the latter. The goal was making the national meet, something I've never done. And that's for a lot of my career. It was always just like, what's the next step? If we exceed expectations, awesome, but let's not jump the gun. So I didn't finish 20th and was like, okay, I'm ready to take on Justin Knight, right? He won the meet. It was like, okay, I think I can break 14 finally. I think I can maybe make the national meet. So to answer your question earlier, we start training again, take some time off, and I just hurt my foot. But the last day of Christmas break, Christmas break was always so hard for me to stay healthy. I didn't get through a lot of indoor seasons in my college career. And this was another one where I was like, the last day I was like, oh, I don't know if this is gonna be something that heals tomorrow or a week or a month. And we went on our training trip. I wasn't able to run, took two weeks off, got a cortisone shot, and that helped for the short term, which becomes relevant later. Got back into some workouts, ran like an incredibly surprising, to this day have not been able to figure out. I ran 13.48. At Iowa State, right?

At Iowa State, yeah.

And that was like, I don't know how that happened.

And you were second in that race too, right? That's also crucial. That's a really, really competitive race.

Yeah, so I was in the second heat though. So I didn't make the first heat. But I was still super pumped about it. I was the second one out of the indoor meet, which at the time was pretty upsetting. But then I hurt my foot again the week of the Big Ten Conference meet. And I ran about three or four miles that week. Then ran the 5K and I think I was like sixth. And then it was back to drawing board again. I was like, I got to take care of this foot. So from the indoor season, it was all about getting healthy. I took a lot of time starting in the pool, then on the bike, then the altergy. And then by the time I actually felt ready to run again, it was most guys have already ran like 28 minutes flat in the 10K, right? And I was like, oh gosh, here we are. Let's start things off. But so I got a really late start to the outdoor season, which I think actually played in my favor down the road.

Yeah.

It meant you were fresh when it mattered.

Right. Exactly.

So you had some hiccups, but you still came into that big race, the 10K, with belief that you were in a good spot. What were the building blocks of that? Was it just doing the work, putting your head down, getting a consistent block in before it?

Part of it. What wasn't the key to that? I ran a 29.34 at Stanford. And that was like, I don't know if people thought that that was like, oh, just check the regional qualifier. But it wasn't. That was like, all out. That hurt.

And that's tough, because that's a gut check, because guys are running really fast at that.

I just saw results of guys running 28 flat.

Who you were going to compete against.

And 29.34 isn't even in by that much. Nowadays, that's like, OK, you're 30th, but you made it. And there were some splits there that Sully was getting pretty worried in the last K. So that was kind of a moment where I was like, oh, shoot. Like, you know, that 13.48, I was kind of hoping like magic moment was going to happen like that again. But it was like, all right, you know what? Take it for what it is. We got the regional mark. That's good for right now. Got through a 10K with the foot feeling good. Those are all positives. Back to work. And then from that point on, things just like really started to come together. And one of the biggest changes we made in training is I started working out with the Milers. And I was never a closer in races. I was not a guy who wanted to come down last 200. If there was someone on me with 2K to go, like...

You were on the front pushing?

Exactly. I was like, I gotta go to the front, or I'm gonna lose to all these guys. So we started doing workouts with the Milers, and all of a sudden, 30 second pace wasn't that hard anymore. And then 29 second pace wasn't that hard anymore. 28, 27. And that really helped with everything. It made 64s feel better. It made 68s feel better. It made 10K pace feel better.

It allows a 56 get thrown down late in a race.

Exactly, so that was a big part of it. And all of a sudden, things just really came together by the time Big 10s came around. And it was a very inspiring moment because it was like, okay, I feel like I'm back, right? I won Big 10s my sophomore year. I was eighth the year after. And it's like, I can finally maybe win another title. And nowadays, that seems, I wanna make sure I highly emphasize how important to that, that was the biggest thing at the time for the year. NCAAs was like, we'll get there. I don't see myself winning yet. It was like, I wanna win this Big 10 title. And then from that point, the races are really what helped instill those final pieces of like, wow, I'm at a much different level I've ever been before.

So let me get this clear. When you talk to your coach, who's won multiple NCAA titles as in a multiple time Olympian, that you wanna win the NCAA championships in the 10, 000, the day of the race, you're basically saying that with not a whole lot of background to give you sort of the, you really meant it when you said, like, do I really, sheepishly, do I really, is this something I should really say to him? Is this something I should really believe? Talk about the anatomy of that belief because it sounds to me like it comes from who you are as a human being, that it comes from your youth, that it comes from your high school days, that you say, I believe I'm a champion, I believe I can win. So give us the anatomy of that or sort of how that worked. And I don't really care about how you built that up, but more what that constitutes in your head as you stand there without the results behind it and are able to say, I believe I can do X, and then you go out, surprise the world and deliver. Because I think this is a really important point for our listeners to hear. One of the things I think that we try to do with our podcast all the time is bring what the elite athlete does on a day-to-day basis and what happens in their world, in their story, that's relevant to them. And so I want you to talk a little bit about that because this is no different than somebody who says they want to try to get an Olympic trials qualifier or somebody who says they want to get under four hours for the first time in the marathon or somebody who wants to break 20 minutes for the first 5K. Are they standing there with their coach or in their situation saying, I believe I can do something that looks on paper to be impossible, however I believe? What made you believe? What's the anatomy of that?

Yeah, that's a tough one to answer. I think it's an amazing question. And I agree with the point that I think it's relatable in so many different contexts than my personal experience. It's hard to say. Honestly, I've always been really competitive, as a lot of us are. And I think there's a lot of times where I wanted something, but there was part of me that knew it just wasn't there yet, right? It was like, oh, you know, I want to, let's say the year I was eighth in the Big Ten and the 10K, I wanted to win. But I knew, I was like, I wish I was at the point that I want to be right today. And this was the first time where I was like, okay, the want never changed. I've always wanted to win nationals, right? Today's the day where I'm like, I'm finally ready to do it. So I believed. And I really, I meant it, like you said. Like it was like, this isn't something that like, like that's why I was even comfortable bringing it up because I didn't want someone to laugh at my face and be like, yeah, okay. Right, but I really, really meant it. And that didn't come from the day itself, but it was just like the whole process, the lead up, the build up, like all the training. You know, to me, it made sense. Like, you know, I don't know if someone else like went through my training log. I don't keep a training log, so that won't happen either way. But you know, say someone did, I don't know if they would have calculated it and said the same thing. But for what my criteria was, I checked all the boxes. You know, I was like, wow, I don't know why this feels so right, but it really does. And I know I can do this today. And yeah, I really meant it. So I don't know if that really answers your question.

So you believed, so that's the first part, even if it was beyond belief, right? You didn't care because for you, you believed. Another key component is you surrounded yourself and you told this to somebody who you trusted, who provided you with another affirmation that you also could do that. So talk a little bit about that, about the circle of people around you who put you in a position to be as successful as you were.

Right, that's such an important note because I'm very fortunate. I have a fan, I've always had a really, really remarkable support system throughout my college career. And Sully's a really unique case because he checks multiple blocks. Like my family, they trust, they don't know the splits, they don't know the race results as well, they don't know the training, what it shows I'm indicative of. But if they heard me say, I think I can win, they're like, oh, I trust him, right? They're gonna trust me unconditionally. So that's cool, right? And I think that's in another way equally as important. But Sully is kind of this mesh of like, oh, he trusts me because he knows me as a person, he knows my morals, he knows we connect on a personal level, but he also won NCAAs. He's also a remarkable coach. He also has coached the national champion. So it was kind of a lineup of like, oh, he believes in me as a person, but he also believes in me as an athlete and really understands the credibility of what it takes. So that's why I think the conversation with him was so special. It's like, whoa. And I had the same conversation with him when I won my first Big Ten title. And it's the same story. It was like, wow, the only thing I was afraid of was someone whose opinion mattered so much to me saying that it couldn't happen. And who knows if that did happen? I don't even want to think about that. I don't know.

You don't need to, because it's already happened. So who needs to spend time there? But you believed, and then you surrounded yourself with people who believe in you as well.

Absolutely.

And you only spent time and only listened to the yayers and not to the nayers. I just think that's an important piece that if you want magic to happen, if you want these supposedly unforeseen circumstances to occur, hard work had to be done, you had to believe, and then you needed to be with people who also believed in you. And then guess what? Magic can fucking happen. That's how magic does happen.

You missed a step though, Steve. He also had a meticulous plan. That's true. To me, that's the other layer of this. You believed, you got affirmation from your coach, and then you went to work to say, okay, how do I need to execute to put myself in position? Because look, at the end of the day, in a race, you don't know how everybody else is gonna show up and what they're gonna bring to the table. Kiprop could have run off and killed everybody, like Shazerac has done in the past, right? In which case, you'd have said, hey, nice race, man.

Second place, going for second.

But you did the planning and you said, all right, this is what I need to do to put myself in position to be able to kick him down in the last lap. So talk a little bit about that. What were the different factors you guys were thinking about from an execution standpoint?

Yeah, and the only thing I want to add, the last piece to that last question, is I do like what you said about the avoid and the naysayers. And sometimes you can't is the important thing. There's going to be naysayers either way. But just trying to unpack why, does it really matter if this person says I can't, right? I think is something that's really crucial as well. And because a lot of times people take those comments so, so seriously when there may not even be a lot of substance behind it, whether it's someone else's insecurities, are they saying it? Do they really mean it? Who knows?

Or they're just a mean person.

Or they're just mean, right? So I think it's like, yeah, like talking to people who really trust and like valuing those opinions, I think is something that's, was super helpful for me. And you know, hopefully others can relate to as well. As for the race, to-

How'd you and Sully set it up? What was your plan?

Right, right, right. So this is the last thing that I wanted to talk about, because it blends in well with this question, is talking about another like indicator that I was ready. And this is something that gets overlooked really well, and I think it was a huge part of why NCAAs happened the way it did. But at the regional meet, the East prelim, it was Kiprop and I with 200 meters to go, and I tried to pass him with 200 meters to go on the outside, and he held me off. And he held me off all the way in the final straightaway, and then he accelerated from 100 meter to go to the finish line. And I also got beat by Kipkoich in that race as well. But it was something I noticed, I was like, wow, if I try to pass this guy too early, he's not gonna let me. And it took so much energy to try to go on the outside and not get anything out of it, right? Still be in second place by the time you hit the homestretch, and then you gotta try again. That's hard to do.

So you had your intel.

So I had my intel. And that, to me, we closed in 57 point that race. That was honestly the race, that was the race itself where I was like, okay, I'm ready to roll in Eugene, because I'm doing things I've never done before. So going in the race, we decided, step one is make as few mistakes as possible. It wasn't about doing anything special or in the race. It was about avoiding doing anything that was gonna cost me later. So where that could happen was when the first lap went out in the 61, right? Like there was a reason I was in 10th instead of second, right? Is like, I know I'm not, I can't run, what, 25 flat for the 10K. And nobody could in that race, right? So I was like, there's no reason for me to go with that, right? And at the time, that's what I trusted. And I was like, okay, so what's the best way to conserve energy? Like follow someone who's gonna follow that move eventually. So it was like, instead of responding, it was like respond to who's going to respond. So just never use excess energy. And then the biggest thing was just being in position with a lap to go, being in contention. It wasn't ever really about setting up a plan to win, but setting up a plan to be in position to win. And if you watch the race, you'll see it just was responding to everything. When there's three guys left in the race and someone makes a move, it's no longer responding to the responder. You gotta just respond. And then when it was Kipropenai 200 meters ago, it was deja vu. It was don't make a move until you can't wait any longer essentially, because he's gonna do everything he can to not let you pass. And I knew he was gonna accelerate from 100 to go all the way to finish. So a little bit of a risky tactic, waiting that long. And it was honestly really hard to even just like stay with him from 200 to 100 ago. But that was pretty much-

Yeah, he had gapped you. You had gotten away from the next group. And we'll have a little shot of, there's a lot of video footage of your last 200 meters, which is really cool to watch. He had gapped you going into the 200, and you could see you were starting to close him down. So when was the point that you said, "I can win this"? Did it, was it 10 meters from the finish when you start to realize he's not there? Or is it with 150 to go when you started seeing that gap close, and then he obviously didn't respond to you when you went by him. So when is it that you say, damn, and CAA champion? When is it that you're feeling it, feeling it?

Yeah, a lot later than 150. 150 was honestly the moment where I was like, holy, I'm gonna be second in the country, and that's amazing. I've never done that before, right? And those moments happen, and it's pretty hard to shut them down that late in the game. But it was like, okay, no, no, regroup, you're still in this for the win, right? So coming to 100 meter to go was like, the gap wasn't incapable of making up, and that's a lot of races I've gone into 100 meter to go, you know, where I gave too much real estate that it's hard to come back from. So it was just about getting there, just getting to 100 meter to go close, and then you can just go all out, and that's all you can do and see what happens. So I think about 80 meters to go is when it was just like, okay, you gotta just do everything. And as soon as I tried, and it actually happened.

Yeah, you got on his shoulder and he did not fight you. He didn't die, but he didn't fight you.

And those moments are super uncertain, I think is like... They totally are. When you start kicking like that, you never... I didn't think I was running crazy fast. The only evidence I have is that I was like, he was getting closer and not further, and I was like, oh, Jesus, that's pretty working, right? And like... Hayward erupted, which was super cool.

That is another aspect to it, too.

I think so. Like, that was like, whoa, like, these guys, like...

They're cheering for me.

Yeah, like, obviously something's happening. And then...

They're certainly cheering for you, and it's not a black-white thing. That was a known quantity and an unknown quantity. And every single time, Hayward Field is going to cheer for the underdog. Every single time.

Yeah, I think it was... I think they were so excited about it being a race. They were like, wow, this thing's accidentally come down the wire, right? And in a moment where you brought up, there was a split second where I looked out of it, and it's like, oh, wait, there's more. So I think in general, they were just entertained. I think it was they were cheering for just a spectacle more than anything else. Because I don't know why they'd be personally invested in me.

Actually, you'd be surprised. That's the most intelligent and informed...

Oh, they know.

They know. That's the most intelligent and informed populace you will ever run. Even if you go to the Olympics, the Olympic field will not know as much as Hayward Field knows. Especially that back, that homestretch, as you come down it.

One thing I want to unpack that you said, because I talk to my athletes about this concept all the time, we're taking 215 runners to California International Marathon this weekend. And a lot of people going for personal bests, some trying to run their first marathon. But you said, I didn't need to know I could win, essentially, but just to put myself in position to be there. And that's something I've said this week as I've talked to some of my runners. I said, you don't have to know that you can break four hours in the marathon. All you have to do is get to mile 21 on plan. Don't make mistakes, like you said. Put yourself in position. And then of course, do your homework to know how to deal with the mental demons that are gonna come at the end. But you don't have to know how it's gonna feel. You don't have to know what you're gonna do at that point. All you have to do is put yourself in position and then let the training do the work, let the mental preparation you've done do the work. Let the magic happen, so to speak. So talk about that mindset, because it's so hard not to try to basically run it in your head all the way to the finish, right?

Yeah, totally. And you know, the one thing I like you said is like, you don't have to know what you're gonna feel like that late in the game. And the only thing I'd add is that is you don't, you like legitimately have no way of knowing what it's gonna feel like. You have no information that's really gonna talk like until you're there, who knows, right? So it's like, You might feel great. You might feel great. You might feel terrible, who knows, right? So I think for me, I've definitely gained appreciation for a race, kind of being a constant evaluation throughout and not in like an incredibly like neurotic way or anything like that, or like anxious way, just like very much accepting like, you know, and trying to acknowledge where I'm at throughout the whole process. And I think, you know, that's been a lot easier because the equation of like expectation, like versus reality is something that concerns people, I feel like. So it's like, if you set these expectations for how you're supposed to feel, you know, with five miles to go in a marathon, and it doesn't feel like that, you kind of panic. But if you never really set those expectations, you're just like, you know what, we'll get there when we get there. I trust where I'm at right now, I feel good. We'll see what the next mile feels like. I think that can kind of alleviate that anxiety in the later stages of the race, because you're just working with the present moment, as opposed to trying to constantly battle the uncertainties of the unknown in the future, right?

Run the mile you're in. It's cliche, but it's true. I also tell people, stop thinking so much about the what if negatives. We always go to that what if bad things happen? What if I feel bad? What if I fall apart at the end? What if I can't kick what I need to kick? We always go to the what if negatives, but I try to train people to flip that. Whenever those come, go to the what if positives. What if I feel great? What if I pass them at the end? What if I out kick them and I ask where my mom is? I mean, not that you would have gotten that far, but you know what I mean? It's like, think more about the what if positives than the what if negatives.

That's so true. I actually love that, because it's a really great practice as being like, why are you thinking of the negatives? It's like, there's really, it's because you're scared probably, which is totally understandable. It's a scary thought. You've trained for years, a year, or how much time for this event. It's okay to be nervous about it, but it doesn't have to be negative. There's equally, like equal likelihood it could be, you could totally surprise yourself. So I think that's good. If you're gonna consider uncertain possibilities, consider all of them, right across the board.

The, we gotta talk about your mom. I read it, she's interviewed by Sports Illustrated, right? She's got an interview, if you look up on SI. Cause you crossed the line, you're like, where's my mom, where's my mom? She was on the other side of the track, from what I understand. She said she was cheering for you loudly as you came by. I think she may have caught her eye at least once. Were you aware of her presence during the race?

Yes, yeah, this is a question I've gotten. For how many times I've gotten, I feel like I still haven't really figured out how to answer it, which is really interesting. But yeah, I mean, I knew she was there. She visited me that morning. I talked to them and I told them that day of the race, I was like, I think I'm gonna be in the mix for the win. And they were like, sweet, we're excited to watch. And that was kind of it. My parents have been very supportive of my entire athletic career through the ups and downs and very accepting of what they want me to enjoy it. So they've never really cared so, so much about the objective performance. It was more like if I was stoked with it, they were stoked with it. So yeah, I think it was a moment of just like disbelief. Honestly, like I just didn't, I couldn't like the whole race, it made sense. Like it was like, hey, like I'm in top eight. I'm in top seven, top six, top five. I'm gonna win this thing. And like I was dialed in and like accepting the moment. But like the moment that I realized like what had just been done and like the magnitude of it relative to like what my ambitions have been my entire career, it was just like, like I can't believe this just happened. And the where's my mom thing was just like kind of a moment of like, who gets this right now? Like who gets like what this really means to me? And it's like, you know, dad does too. He got no love in the moment.

But like, hey, that's all right, that's all right.

Dads always get love.

Yeah.

Shout out to the moms out there.

Sorry, so here's, where's my dad? Here it is right now, a few months later. But that was basically it. It's just like, like she gets, like she gets what this means to me right now more than anybody else in the world. So it was just like, like I just wanted to share that experience with her right then and there, which you know, doesn't make a lot of sense because she can't hear me on the Jumbotron. And I can't like, it didn't do anything. But in the moment, that's like where my brain was at.

How long did it take to actually see her?

I did on my victory lap. I went straight over to them because they were like, they were like, oh, like come with us. I was like, no. I'm going backstretch like, Gotta go see my mom. Yeah, I gotta go see my mom. And my dad is like so, my dad is totally reckless. He's like infamous for like just doing what he ever, he wants to attract me. Like he just jumped on Hayward's track.

And I was like, totally, totally not the appropriate thing to do. Right.

I'm like that.

Your son just won NCAA title.

And he got away with it. And the same thing happened at Falmouth. He like crashed into like the finishing line booth and like security got like super uptight about it. I was like, dad, like we got to, like this isn't like my high school meets anymore. Like people are like legitimately care about you trespassing. You gotta like, we gotta figure out a plan now.

Yeah, we love it, Mr. Flanagan. Keep doing it, keep doing it. Forget the rules, break the rules.

Yeah, it doesn't matter what I say. He's gonna do it either way. So the enabling will only help.

So what did that do for your belief in your future as a runner? Obviously you believed that you could do it going in, but I would imagine you probably didn't think much beyond that and certainly didn't know you'd be walking away with an NCAA title. So you're underneath the stands, you're reflecting afterwards somewhere quiet once the chaos sort of died down. Did your mind go crazy of, shoot, if I can do this, I can do X, Y, Z? Or was it sort of like, holy shit, what now?

Yeah, that's probably the latter, to be honest. First step was just enjoying the moment. Just like I got a lot of great support and messages from family, friends, you name it, and it was just like, all right, you know what? Everyone that's taking the time to acknowledge me right now, I wanna make sure I express my gratitude. So that was step number one is just accept it all. Stretch, I didn't stretch actually at all, so I'm not even ous to pretend I did. But in terms of like, this is pretty interesting because considering the summer I had, I think it's very easy to assume that that was all planned, but it really wasn't. It was like, I planned on meeting with an agent the next day, like after that was all organized because I wanted to figure out what post-collegiate options would be, because that was the biggest thing is there's like, down down the road, this is awesome for what it's gonna do for my career. But right now, I have a chance to run post-collegiate league and this opens up a lot of opportunities for me, which that was also a big part of it.

Yeah, you went from local option to national option in one fell swoop.

Exactly, honestly, if I came second in that race, I don't know if the opportunities would have been the same. So that's kind of the drastic change in where I was versus, I guess, where I was before the race and where I was after. But on my conversation with, I sat down with Sully and my agent, meeting at the time, and now my agent, Dan Leelow, and we kind of just talked about what the next steps were. And we honestly didn't even plan on racing. We're like, let's just run tomorrow, the next day, and see where we're at.

Back to work.

Yeah, and it wasn't even hard work. It was just go, only run if you want to, anywhere from five minutes to no more than 30. And I just kept running every day. And yeah, once I started to, that's when I started to really reflect on it, right? Because it was so, it was really hectic, like still acknowledging people's messages. And then there's a couple of interviews here and there, and watching the other events. Like it was just crazy. It all happened, like there was so much happening. But I would say, you know, aside from like logistically what happened, like in my head, it was definitely a transition of like, okay, when I really think I can do something and I really believe I can do something, like I can, I can freaking, I can do it now, right? And it's like, like, I've always had those dreams. I always want to win an NCAA title. I wanted to break four minutes a mile. These were things I've always wanted to do and that hasn't changed, but it's like, like, I'm not crazy, I can do these things, right? Like, these are things that are legitimately attainable. And I think proving that to myself kind of like instilled a trust in myself that I never had. It was never at the magnitude that it was at that point.

So after NC's, was Bix your next race? Did you run, was Bix your next race?

I ended up running that Canadian 5K, I was telling you.

Oh, that's right, the one that you won.

I was third. Oh, you was third, okay. Yeah, so I ended up running a Canadian 5K on the roads. It's probably the one you're referring to in September. But so NC is what, June? Late June or mid-June, I was like, okay, Canadian track and field championships. Honestly, the main reason I wanted to go was just because I was done being a student athlete. I didn't have to worry about cross country in the fall. I didn't run a lot of Canadian meets.

Next step.

Yeah, because I didn't get to, it was hard to balance both because the schedule was kind of conflict. So it's like, wow, I get to run in Canada again. Like, this is awesome. You know, it'd be cool to go back. You know, I know a lot of Canadians follow the NCAA meets. So it was mostly just to like, get the chance to run in Canada again. And Justin Knight was going back. Muhammad Ahmed was on the start line. I was like, oh my gosh, this is going to be a sweet event.

That's cool.

So I was third to Mo and Justin. Justin, I had 15 years ago, that was my first time ever beating Justin Knight in recent time. And I started to go lactic and I was like, oh, if you go lactic, you got Justin Knight on your shoulder. You're in big trouble. So he nipped me at the line. And Mo was an impressive running. He closed in 54.

Yeah, but there's another thing that must, at that point in time, reinforce. Because the guys we were talking about, the guys that you're watching, the guys that you looked up to as heroes, now you're, with 100 meters to go, let's say 400 meters to go, you're with them, you know. One of them, with Justin, you're still ahead of with 50 meters to go, and he gets you at the line. So how does that, then it's like, oh, this is really real. Did you know it then, or were you more along the lines of, is this a moment where you say, oh, I can go get and run with anybody in the country and anybody in the world? Or do you say, oh, I'm just on this high, maybe I should just hold on to this high for as long as I can?

No, I would say the first point you made, I was like, it really, that was, honestly, that race, I set up a PR in the 400 in the last lap. So it's like, that was another thing where I was like, I'm doing things I've never done before, and I can close races now, that changed everything for me, because now I can just relax, stay comfortable in races, and trust my closing speed. That's something I wanna be able to always do, because it changes racing style a lot.

Ben, you'll always be able to do it if you believe you can do it.

Exactly.

That's the one thing I can tell you about closing speed is, closing speed has nothing to do with the workouts you do. Although the workouts you did that Coach Sully gave you to make you believe that you could kick, doing those milder workouts were critical and crucial. People know how to find, horses know how to find the barn if they're real horses. So you're a real horse, obviously, and you'll always know how to find the barn as long as you're fit enough to be able to be in it when you need to be.

Right, that's a great point.

You ran at Bix, which is a really big road race in the US, and it's definitely big in the road racing scene. And that was like your first road race?

Yeah, first road race.

So you go to what is considered, what it was, the US Championship, but you're not a US athlete, but they have an international field. And you get second there. How did that race play out? What did it look like? And did you believe going in that you could win it? Or were you more along the lines of saying, let's just see where I am. I know you have a kind of a quote that says, I just have to be there for the last, if I can be there at the last mile, then I have a chance, right? Is that the way you went into it?

Yeah. Yeah, I think that was a similar, like I've never been on the roads before, so I wanted to avoid pretending I knew what to expect because I really didn't. But I was like, hey, you know what? I'm in great shape. And this, honestly, the Canadian champs after that, I was like, all right, you know what? Things feel good right now. Legs are feeling good. Like, let's just keep training and let's line up for BICS. Let's try it. So that was a moment where I was like, I think I can be in the mix. Same idea as NCAAs, and that was the goal. Just like be in the lead group. Don't push the pace because you're not, you're at the point now where it doesn't really make sense in terms of experience level. There's guys who've run this course many times, like trust those guys to make those decisions and respond to the responder. It was kind of the plan there as well. And yeah, basically, like, honestly, that was an interesting race because it just kind of just found myself in second with two miles to go. Like it was like people were falling off and I just didn't.

You're super fit.

Right, I was fit and I was like, awesome. Like I was not expecting to be up this early, and then, you know, the winner ran spectacularly. He dropped me by like 20 seconds or so, but coming second in that race was like a big deal for me. Like that was-

That's a seven mile race for those that don't know bigs.

Yeah, it was super, you know, it was, that was really special for me as well. And to know that like the roads were that smooth of a transition was like pretty addicting. Like I wanted to get my hands on another one as soon as possible.

And then Falmouth later got the big win. First North American athlete in 30 years to take the top spot there, beat Scott Faubel, who was second American in New York, Leonard Carrere, US 10K champion on the track. That's pretty legit, right?

Steven Sambu, who was like a two-time winner of that race and kind of owned that race before him.

There were some serious scalps to be taken there and you win.

In your Michigan singlet, right? In your Michigan singlet, go blue.

What was that like?

That was crazy, honestly. It was crazy, really amazing experience. Falmouth, like, Bix was my first exposure to what the road race environment is like. And Falmouth was like, it was crazy. There's people everywhere. They take the race, the local community just takes the race so seriously and that was so cool to just be involved in. So that part was awesome. The race itself, it was like, a lot less emotional side of that story I was telling you with Sully earlier about the believing I could win. It was like, I was in bed at like nine o'clock because you gotta get up early for those road races. And Sully called me at like nine oh five and I was like, oh. He's like, oh, sorry to wake you. I was like, no, no, no, I'm good. What's up? He's like, just wanna let you know that, think you're ready to go. I was like, yeah, same. I was like, I think I got a shot to being content for the win. He's like, yeah, I do too. I was like, all right, sweet. Check in tomorrow.

See you later.

And then that does it, right? So it's like same idea, but just like-

A little simpler.

Yeah, way simpler. It wasn't like this big emotional thing. We're like, yeah, you know what? We've been here before. This isn't that different. And that was like, this race really epitomizes a lot of those philosophies we were talking earlier about, run in the mile you're in. Don't anticipate the future. Don't set these expectations. Just embrace what's going on in the moment. Because it was like, first mile, we went through in like 431, and I was like, I've never done that before, but that felt pretty good.

So I'm just gonna roll with it.

That's fast, but keep rolling. Go through 10K in 28.50, that's my second fastest 10K ever. I've never run-

On a tough course, that's not an easy course.

So I was like, it was just kind of just accepting what was going on, and with a mile to go, I was still in the mix. I was like, all right, this is where it starts. And Scott Faubel made a really aggressive move to the front, and from that point, it was just like responding. And then with four miles to go, same idea. It's like, well, here's where you give everything you got and see what happens. And when I got a gap, and if you've seen that video, I was clearly... Yeah, a little happy. I was really excited. So I didn't really know what to do with my hands, and I was just like throwing up.

I mean, the authentic reactions you have to races are endearing.

Thank you, yeah, that was genuine. I just couldn't believe it.

No, I mean, I believe it. I mean, I think part of what our sport needs is people that are just willing to be authentic, and whatever comes out, comes out, whatever happens, happens, whatever. Jazz hands or whatever you have to do.

I watched it after. I was like, jump over the finish line? I was like, sure, didn't pay up.

Didn't expect that.

Yeah, I was like, at least my hops look way better than they really are.

They had you at a good angle.

Yeah, they did. It was like the feet were elevated up that actually looked like I had a decent vertical.

Right.

I didn't.

One thing I want to go back on, so you have this amazing summer, and we'll kind of book in this, big win in SEAS, big win at Falmouth, but you had an up and down collision career dealt with a sacrum stress fracture, sacral stress fracture, which is basically a bone in the pelvis, for those that don't know.

Yeah.

I actually have an athlete I coached for the marathon. He was just diagnosed with one.

I'm starting to hear that.

So it happens, right? But you have up and down collision career with injury. What kept you going on the path? You mentioned the foot injury that you had to deal with over the winter. How do you work through those things to then have the breakthroughs on the other side?

I would love to say that going into those injuries, that it's like, oh, it'll be fine. I'm gonna win NCAAs and win Falmouth. I can get through some hard times, no problem. But that's not what it's like at all.

It wasn't guaranteed.

I was like, I don't know if I'm ever gonna run fast again. Again, setting those expectations is tough to do it, especially when things are hard, because you don't know what's gonna happen. So there was a lot of things that kept me going, and we touched on them a lot in different questions, like the positive support from family, friends, teammates was a huge part of it. My career in Michigan, I was fortunate enough that I was like, I was relied on to be a contributor. So it was important for me to do everything I could to contribute to the team, whether it be on the track or in cross country. So it was important that I was holding myself accountable, that when I was hurt, I was making sure I could get, do everything I could to get back. I love the sport, but yeah, there were some times that were really hard, especially the sacral stress fracture. That's one that right off the bat, Doc's like, hey, you're gonna take 12 weeks off of running. And it's just like, I don't have 12 weeks. Like what are you talking about, right?

That's three months.

Yeah, three months, right? I was like, yeah.

That's a tough one.

Yeah, exactly. And it's like, you know.

And then you gotta rebuild. I mean, you gotta gradually rebuild so you don't re-injure yourself.

And the scary thing about the NCAA, in terms of your mindset at the time, which I think is, in hindsight, I would change, but it's hard to, it's hard when you're in it. It's like every missed time is like a missed season, right? Like you're told you have this amount of seasons, you can register at this amount, but it's like, once you get past your red shirt, it's like, oh, I just lost another season. Oh, I lost another season. It kind of feels like you're like constantly battling time with the clock. So that was really hard. But you know, I took cross-training really, I took it very seriously. And I don't know if I would do the same things I did then, now, if like I was to find myself in the same situation, because I think at times, I probably took cross-training like even too seriously. Like I was working myself really hard to the point that I was like, it was really, I was having a tough time. But I was gonna say like the best things I think I did were like taking small victories was a huge part of it. Like every day I was like, okay, like what, there's gotta be a victory out of this. Because it's just like, if you focus on how much it sucks, it's like, it's really hard to make it sustainable. So there was different ways we did that. My teammates, we set up a group me chat where we posted our accomplishments of the day and really tried to encourage each other no matter what. Because it can kind of feel like your loss or in the dark when you're cross training and your performances are-

You're not with the team.

You're not with the team. And the constant feedback is pretty tough. So I tried to find parallels. So it's like, okay, what do I like about running? I loved seeing progress. I loved seeing split times, right? Aqua jogging, I didn't get that. So I was like, well, maybe I'll start swimming because then I can clock myself in a 100 meter time trial and see if I'm making progress. And another way I did that is I started playing guitar and I was like, well, I'll get progress this way. So I was like, trying to like find parallels, like what I liked about the sport, how can I fulfill these and other aspects of my life? And then you just about taking it, like getting back right as opposed to getting back fast and accepting that like it's a process. It takes a long time to get fit. And honestly, right now, after taking some time off after my summer, that's something I'm having to remind myself again, is it's like it takes time to get into peak shape. So yeah, I think those injuries are definitely some of the harder points in my career, but I think it's probably where I've learned some of the most valuable lessons and probably changed a lot about my training philosophies, my behaviors, because there's probably a lot of times previous to those situations where I had a tendency to overdo things, I think I've addressed that now and it's one of the reasons why I've been able to.

Take your lessons, right?

Yes, exactly.

Plus, you come back stronger. I mean, a pelvic stress fracture, you've got to work on core. You've got to basically prevent it from happening again. So you've got to become a stronger, better athlete, right? And all of that progress comes with it too. So I want to contrast that with a recent, what I'm going to call failure in air quotes, which is you got night that Canadian Cross, you came into that race as a favorite. And I would assume that you're thinking, I can win this thing on the starting line there. You show up, you're not really in it. I mean, at 5K, you were back. And then from there, just kind of got worse. And so I can't imagine that's the result you wanted. So you had a bit of, again, air quotes failure, ninth in the national title meet isn't bad by any stretch, but I'm sure it didn't meet your standards.

You would have taken that result the year before.

Oh yeah, I mean, yeah.

But expectations are different. So how do you deal with that air quotes failure?

Yeah, I'm definitely gonna be honest. It was disappointing for sure. And it's like, the summer I had, it was just like everything. It was either fantastic or even better. It was just coming out of every, my parents are like, man, this is awesome to hang out with you after these races cause you're loving it no matter what, right? Parents of kids, a disappointing race, sometimes they're not the most, you gotta give them time and space sometimes. It's tough with the rally, but I'm really trying to, I've broken it down, I've reflected on it, and I've definitely got some lessons. And I think it kind of touches back on, I believed I could win. And I don't think that's necessarily wrong cause I do think in context, I could have won, right? But I think acknowledging where I was really at the time would have probably been of my best interest to really get the most of my performance. Like, I don't think, you know, Luke Brachette's crazy fit right now. Like Mike Tate, all those guys, Ehab, like Evan S. Link, those guys are all great runners. And like, the honest truth is, I needed to be in better shape to compete with those guys. Or, you know, I think if I raced smarter, I think I could have been closer. I still don't think that would have been enough to win. But I think it's given me a lot of insight into like, okay, like, where did those original, like, you know, like, capital B belief that we were talking about early come from? Like, it's a mix of that constant, you know, I'm competitive and I believe I can do these things. But it's also like finding some evidence along the way. And, you know, workouts were good. And they were good relative to the last in this buildup, like ultimately for world championships in September. But, you know, the professional scene is new for me. And lining up at Canadian Cross is something I really wanted to do. But I think it was a lot to ask of myself to be like, okay, you know what, I just took this break. We've got, you know, six weeks-ish of training under my belt, but I want to come in, like, win this thing. It's just like, I think that was a little bit... And maybe if training was different, and maybe we were approached differently and we put it all in for Canadian Cross, it would have been differently. But I think it's just accepting that it's like, hey, you know what, there's gonna be times where you're on and you're peaked, and the goal is to make those the meets that you prioritize the most. And there's other races where you're not gonna be 100%, but you have to manage it, right? And like, the thing I'm disappointed about it now is I don't think I needed to be nine. I think I could have ran smarter. I think I could have approached the race differently. And I think I could have, you know, prioritize making the World Cross Country Team, for example. And I think that would have taken a different mindset approaching it. So what I would have changed, I wouldn't have changed my training leading up, I wouldn't have changed the idea that like, oh, I believe I could win this in a certain context, but I would have changed like, okay, here's where I'm at right now. Going out with the leaders, Luke Braschett's gonna take them to the front, that's probably not the smartest move. Let's reel it back, let's stay in fifth, let's run smart, let's make fourth place the new win, because that's what's gonna get you on the cross country team. And check the ego at the door, basically is like what I would have changed if I would do it all again. But that being said, I do want to acknowledge that it's like a huge privilege to just run in Canada at any time. It's my first time being at the Canadian Cross Country Championships in years. And people were super supportive before and after, which was cool considering, I do think the result was disappointing overall.

There's also a lesson here, which is that fitness is not linear. Everybody wants it to be. You have a breakthrough, you get a PR, you run a great race, and you think, oh, it's only up from here, but you gotta come off that peak, you gotta reset, rebuild, and then build ultimately to a higher peak, and you're in that process, right?

And I think it's given me a huge appreciation for other professional athletes, right? Because I spent my entire, like I told you earlier, I'm a big track nerd, I look at the results, and I just take athletes by their name, right? I take the athlete, their best accolade, and that's my expectation any day of the 365th of the year, right? And now I understand that it's like, there's so much more context than that, right? And I think some of the big names I beat in Falmouth and in other races, it's awesome, I'm incredibly grateful for those experiences, but it's good to acknowledge that on the professional scenes, people's timelines just are so different.

The guy you out kicked at Falmouth was preparing for a marathon that was gonna happen on November 4th.

Exactly, right.

So it's not apples to apples. You guys were in different spots. I guarantee you Scott Faubel came off that finish line and said, whippersnapper got me. Oh well, he just came off, won the NCAA championships and the 10K, okay, that makes sense, right? He wasn't happy about it, but he was able to do what you did and say, okay, maybe I could have done something a little differently, but maybe I couldn't have either.

Right.

But speaking about training, so you finished that, okay, you're summer. You win the NCAA championships, you win Falmouth, you get second at Bix, which is huge. You break four for the mile, sub four for the mile, by the way, he's a 10K guy, folks, right?

Also huge.

That's huge. And I know it was something that you were really excited about. I mean, I think that your PR before that was like 408 or 407 or something.

Yeah, 407.

And you won the Canadian Road Championships in the 5K. So it was just like bang, bang, bang. And then most importantly, or most importantly to the folks that brought you to Austin, Texas, is you got a professional deal. So you signed with Reebok that just started a new club with a new coach, with Justin Knight and Coach Chris Fox. Talk a little bit about the decision to do that. And then that's the first thing. I wanna talk about that. And then also, who was coaching you in this buildup? Did you switch coaches? Because if you switched coaches, and I believe you were training away from your new team, there's a lot of reasons that you could look at and say, maybe a poor performance at a race is a coach transition. Also a transition of doing your own training, you're not running with a team every single day and doing your own thing. So talk a little bit first about the exciting decision to represent Reebok and this new team and what this new team is and what it's about. And also how that might have played into this quote unquote as we're giving air quotes around your disappointing race.

Yeah, totally. Yeah, so the whole summer, we're talking about the fun stuff. Well, the other side that I'm about to bring up is also fun, but we're talking about the races, the performances, the whole summer was also like, what are we doing? What am I gonna do next? I need to figure out, if I wanna do this post collegiately, I need to make sure I found a situation that I can do it with. So, the whole summer was figuring that along the way, and halfway through, and I actually wanna bring up one point before that, is because I was so new to it all, with the context of the before NCAAs and afterwards, like right off the bat, I was like, okay, I'm not gonna pretend this is something I totally understand, I know everything about. Any opportunity that comes my way, I wanna take seriously, I wanna learn all about it, and I don't wanna make a decision on anything until I've gotten all information possible. And I'm really glad I made that decision because Reebok wasn't a thing yet. Like the group, like Reebok, the brand obviously wasn't, but the Reebok Boston Track Club, it didn't exist. There was no, Zap Fitness was, and it's still currently as a group, but it wasn't someone I was in contact with. So here comes, late July it might have been, the announcement of Justin Knight, Coach Fox, and the Reebok Boston Track Club. And the moment that happened, it was like, whoa.

Did you know Coach Fox, or did you know him before? Did you look at Syracuse as a place for you to go run?

I didn't, I wish I did, actually. I love the University of Michigan, but it would have been a great visit to check out the campus and meet Coach Fox. And I've had an incredible amount of admiration for their program and Coach Fox, what he's done there has been incredible. And I just hear a lot about Coach Fox by being involved in NCAA, and he's a guy that just everyone has fantastic things to say about him.

He's a character, for sure.

Yeah, yeah, exactly. So, I see this group pop up and was like, wow, this is something I need to learn more about. And I got in contact with the appropriate contacts and we started talking. And the first conversation I had with Coach Smith, Coach Adam Smith, who was also at Syracuse, and Coach Fox, it was just a perfect fit. The philosophies they're speaking about, before they even really knew a lot about me, and they knew my performances, but they didn't know what made me tick and things like that. And everything they were saying about what, and that's something I appreciate in itself. The fact that they were just so transparent about the way they do things, they were looking for a good fit. They weren't looking for necessarily just like, yeah, if he's got these times, quantitative values to bring him, they're looking for guys that fit what they're trying to do.

They get culture. They wouldn't have taken Syracuse from nowhere to somewhere if you don't understand culture. And we are seeing now the post-collegiate groups that are succeeding are the ones that have culture.

Exactly.

And it's a really wise decision because there's a background between Coach Fox and Justin Knight, and you're gonna get great culture there no matter what.

Yeah, exactly. So, you know, that was something I really appreciated is just how upfront they were about, this is the way we do things, and we want it to be a good fit was the most important thing, right? And they were hoping that that was the case, but they don't know a lot about me, right? And I started telling about me and it's like, okay, this is something that's gonna, like, sounds like it's gonna click fantastic. So it just got more and more exciting, you know? And I finally got to test out the, like, Reebok Run Fast Pros at Falmouth. I tried them for the first time the day before the race, which I would never do. Like, that doesn't happen. Like, I'm a crazy one. I've got, like, three foot injuries in the previous year, and I get them and I was like, all right, I guess I'll do strides just to try them. And I was like, damn, I'm wearing these things tomorrow. Yeah, I was like, damn, I'm definitely shot in the stuff. And they got you the win.

And they got me the win. And they got it on camera, too. Yeah, yeah, yeah.

So I was like, all right, well, everything's great, but these shoes are super dope. That's why I'm joining the group. So it was just like, everything was great. Like, Reebok being the brand, Coach Fox being the coach, the group of athletes they were bringing, it was just like, it went from being like, oh, post-collegiate running is awesome, the opportunity is this, to like, this is actually the best case scenario. So, and I also need to admit that it was like, it's hard leaving Ann Arbor, transitioning from Coach Sullivan, he's someone who we've figured out what works, and he's someone who I've personally connected with for a long time. And just the current climate of professional collegiate running, staying in Ann Arbor really wasn't really an option. Like, there wasn't really any opportunity for that to even be the case. But it would have been nice to be able to explore that as an option. But so everything pointed towards this Reebok opportunity. And fortunately, we were able to get the announcement and the commitment made before I got to run the mile on Rhode Island. And my first race in a Reebok uniform and first time in the spikes, first time racing the spikes, to train in them as well, I was able to break four. So that was like a really special introduction to the group. And then to tie this all together with the question you asked, I was still in school and I'm still in school. So I am in Ann Arbor, Michigan, finishing my graduate program. Just about done. Oh my gosh, I'm ready to be done with school.

What's your graduate program in?

I'm in the School of Social Work there. I'm technically part of like a dual master's degree that I committed to prior to figuring out all the post-collegiate stuff. So I'm gonna come away with the master's in social work and the other degree, something I'm gonna be continuing to either work on or figure out once we transition to Charlottesville. But I transitioned coaches, it seemed like that was the best move in terms of getting used to how we do things throughout my time in Ann Arbor. And then when I move in January, being used to at least one component, right? It's just one less thing we have to get used to in terms of the adjustment.

And you don't have time. I mean, you're looking at September and you're looking at transitioning to a new coach and trying to have a big result in September at a World Championships. You've got to get that system under your belt. That's how these things work. It's a very wise decision. Even if it doesn't play out early on, it's definitely the move you have to make. And Coach Fox has worked with a lot of people for a long time and he's going to be able to make adjustments to you. And you're now learning his system in a different place, which means you're gonna have a great appreciation for what it is when you get there and have a lot more knowledge. So I do think it probably played into some of the effect that you had on your race day at Cross, and it's something you should probably also take into consideration, that being there. And I imagine that Coach Fox and Coach Sully have a little bit of a different training philosophy too, based on what I know about both of them. Not diametrically opposed. I mean, Michigan's Michigan, right? It's always volume based in there. But he's a mile coach. I mean, he's a miler and he thinks in that mindset. It's a different way of, whereas Coach Fox is definitely, he works on all those angles at all the time. So you probably had a little bit of transition there too. So talk a little bit about what the training is different, if there is a lot of training difference, or if there's not. It is base phase, so it's really not probably that much different. What differences are you seeing between your experience working in a collegiate system and working in a post-collegiate system where you're kind of on your own?

Yeah, totally. And yeah, and that was like being in Ann Arbor and doing a lot of workouts on my own is something that I was able to do. And it's definitely not ideal, right? So I'm like, the transition is going to be really, really exciting. And the group of athletes that we have as part of the team are all just very young, ambitious and talented.

So who do you have besides Justin Knight there?

So we got Justin Knight, Colin Benny and Philo Germano are both Syracuse athletes as well, former Syracuse athletes with Coach Fox. Robert Dumanek is a 354-mileer from Ole Miss. Yeah, he's from Texas.

He's a Texas kid, yep.

That's right. And then Kamoi Campbell.

From Arkansas, he's Jamaican.

Yep, Jamaican Olympian. And then there's a couple other guys, Adam Visike and Chase Weaverling, who are involved with the group as well. Chase ran at the University of Virginia, so he's been a big part of getting in the way of the land as well, and Adam Visike ran at Virginia and Syracuse, so he's a good connector as well. And then on the women's side, we got Amy Eloise, Neil and Tori Gerlach, who are both exceptional athletes and wonderful people. So, but just by that list of athletes, you can see it's a young group and they're all, this is all new to all of us, and we're all just very excited about everything, which has been a really cool environment to be around. In terms of the transition for the training, it hasn't been that long of a training block. So, you know, Canadian 5K road champs were September 12th, maybe, maybe a few days before that. So, you know, you take your two weeks off and then you run a little bit and then a little bit more and a little bit more.

And yeah, so you're really only less than two months into a block.

Yeah, about that. So, first workout was probably, you know, early to mid October, and then we just going from there. So a lot of the stuff has been base work, which is something I'm used to. So there hasn't been anything radically different by any means. The stuff that's been really nice, kind of just like a smooth transition is like, building mileage has been slow. And like we've approached it very much like feeling base, right? Like we're not boosting mileage just to boost mileage. It's like, oh, when the body feels good, then we'll move up again and slowly. So that's been really nice. So we've been taking things slow, which I think I don't know if that's necessarily related to the coaching change itself, but I think the system change, it's not like we have the urgency of cross country, the opener, the big 10s, the national meet, then the urgency of indoor. It's just we've got time to work with now. So yeah, I would say we're just making sure to take things slow, which I really appreciate because I think that's what keeps me healthy. And I think keeping me healthy is the main factor in terms of just like getting healthy, consistent.

That's what builds champions. Kipchoge has been in the same system for 20 years.

Exactly.

As we talked about.

And I felt healthy and great. So it's been working well.

So we've got maybe time for one or two more. We've got maybe five minutes to go here. But a question I have. Transitioning from collegiate ranks to professional ranks is a big shift. You go from having a team that's there with you, practice this whole support system. And obviously, you have a team now, but it's different. And what I observed just as a fan of the sport is it seems like those who have success at the next level aren't necessarily the ones that had success in college. They're the ones that find a good support system post-collegially. They're also the ones that, as we talk about, sort of know their reasons for running beyond just competing for a team or being good at it and getting results, right? They're able to, as we say, know their why. Why are you doing this beyond just, I've been good at it all my life, people told me to do it, so I kept doing it, right? And so as you think about that and trying to create a career where you might be doing this for 10, 15 years, hopefully competing internationally for a long time, why? What is it about this sport that makes you want to stay in it for a long time?

You know, I don't think I've got a totally unique reason behind it. I think if anything, mine's probably the same reason a lot of runners love it. And get involved is I just, I love the process. I love seeing what you can do and what you can accomplish and how much better you can get by having control over the way you do things, the training, the development. Just the process itself is something I love. The day-to-day buildup towards like trying to accomplish something great is something that I really, really enjoy. And I think the positive feedback of, you know, when it works out especially is something that's like really addicting, honestly. But beyond that, like more recently, just with the way the NCAA has played out and the coverage of it all, it's been really cool to feel like I've had a little bit more of a voice or like a platform to speak to others about or especially like younger runners. And that's something that I've taken pretty seriously. I've taken very seriously. And that's not necessarily related to my performances itself, but I really like that side of it.

You have a platform now.

Yeah, and I like being involved in everything I can be involved in and communicating with others, especially younger athletes if I have any questions or concerns. And I like being able to relate to people because I feel like sometimes athletes at the younger age, if they haven't accomplished what they want and they look up to those who have, it can feel a little bit unrelatable. And I think it's been what I've tried to do, at least recently, is really try to emphasize is my story is really no different than anybody else's. So if you want to accomplish things that I have or even better, you can do it. There's nothing that makes me super different than anybody else, I think is the point I'm trying to make.

The other part of that too, is it's not just younger athletes. I mean, our audience is mostly adult, half marathoners and marathoners, right? They're going to, even though you might be competing in slightly different events, can relate to the story that we were talking about. They can relate to that moment of the uncertainty on the start line, just like you had in NCs, right? So I would just encourage you to think about that voice and message broadly because it's so important. I mean, we're passionate fans and we're trying to build fans. And there's so much continuity between us all trying to move through space in whatever format we're doing it. The more we can share those stories from people like you who understand that the connection is there, the more our sport grows, which ultimately benefits you, benefits your sponsor, gives you opportunities and a bigger voice and a bigger platform, right? So anyway, that's my small bit of advice.

And you're about to have a whole bunch of fans.

Sweet. That makes me happy to hear. Yeah. And I mean, honestly, I think that last comment you really made is like, we're all in it together, right? It's like, we all know what it's like. We're all running circles. It's hard sport. You know, I'm not going to pretend that I have an easier time than anybody else does, but I don't know. I think more than anything, I think it's a very relatable sport. And I like, you know, I like if people can see that from the way I demonstrate my experience or whatever, in whatever way I can hopefully positively influence others. I'm, that's a privilege really, and an honor to be in that position if that's the case.

Well, we appreciate you taking the time. And these kinds of conversations make me feel so good about the future of our sport because people like you, it's in good hands with people like you as athletes and voices in it. If people wanna follow you, what do they need to do? On Twitter, what do we got? We on Twitter, where we at? Insta?

Yeah, I got a little bit of everything.

Snapchat, where we at?

Yeah, Snapchat, a little bit of everything. I'm definitely a big Instagram guy. So I'm very active. I'm active on social media in general.

What are your handles?

My handles are at Ben underscore Flanagan, all A's in Flanagan. That's typically the mix up there. And then on Twitter, it'd be at Benny Flanagan with two N's in Benny.

And a Y?

And a Y, yeah, that's a good question. We gotta call him Benny, that's an IE. But yeah, no, I'm super active on social media and I really like interacting with people on social media. So if anybody listening ever wants to just have a conversation, ask a question or things like that, I take those platforms very serious in terms of their ability to connect and interact with other people.

And where's your next race, if they wanna check that out?

I am flying to Hawaii. Today's Wednesday, right? A week tomorrow. I'll be flying out to Hawaii to run the Honolulu Road Mile. So speaking of that King Chaz comment I made earlier. You'll be there. Yeah, so I know. The conversation I was talking about earlier in terms of he being a guy that I'm gonna be racing, I wish it was in a different time of the year to be totally honest.

Maybe a different distance?

But it'll be fun.

It's getting real.

I am really excited to actually get to meet him as a person, I consider I heard such great things. And then I think Craig Engels, Nick Willis will also be there among some others. So on the female side, there's some great athletes as well.

Willis, another Michigan alum. Well, thank you, Ben, for joining us. Thank you to Reebok for bringing you to us. It's been a really, really awesome conversation. And so thank you for that. Thanks to everybody for listening as well. This has been episode 102 of the Running Rogue podcast. As always, you can check us out at rogrunning.com or follow us on Instagram, Twitter, or the Facebook at Rogue Running. Until next time, we will talk to you soon.