Hey, everybody, welcome to episode 373 of the Running Rogue podcast. Back to you after some spring break travel, and excited to be back with you today with another listener conversation. We're gonna be asking or answering for a listener the question that I get a lot, which is, should I jump to the marathon now from somebody who hasn't yet gotten to that point yet, and maybe has done a 5K or a 10K or a half, and is trying to figure out what to do next, and maybe 26.2 is on the horizon. Well, Marisa, my listener from New York, is asking that very question. And so I talk about that in conversation with her. We're gonna jump right to it. So let's jump in with Marisa. Here we go. Welcome, Marisa, to the Running Rogue podcast. How are you?

I'm doing great. Thank you so much for having me.

Is it Marisa or Marisa?

It's Marisa.

Marisa, okay. As I was saying it the first time, I thought maybe it's different because I had an aunt named Marisa.

Yeah.

I think she still spelled it with two S's though. But anyway, glad I asked. We get that right, Marisa. Well, welcome to the show. Excited to have you on. You sent me an email essentially asking a question and I get a fair amount. And that's one of the reasons why I wanted to have you on, which is, should I do a marathon now? I'm relatively new in my journey or should I wait? And that's kind of the crux of your question. We'll kind of take a little bit of time to answer it, but we'll get a little bit of background first. So first, just tell me a little bit about you as a person and the audience so they can know who you are.

Yeah, I'm 25. I live in New York City. I work in finance. That's kind of it. I'm originally from Philadelphia. Yeah.

Nice. Work in finance as an investment banking or somewhere else?

No, I do asset management.

Okay. It's a little less crazy maybe.

Yeah, it's more manageable. Yeah.

Good. And you are getting into running, relatively new, right? It seems like. So how did that start? What's the story there?

Yeah. I ran a little bit sporadically in high school and college, but it was like three miles here and there, and it was never really something I enjoyed, to be honest with you. But I graduated college in 2021, and I moved to New York City, and I was working a remote job, and I was like, I need to see people. So I joined Orange Theory and I started running through those classes. And I didn't really think much of it. I liked the classes and that was kind of it. But obviously, you end up doing a bit of running. And so I think like March or something of 2022, I was just somewhere else and I couldn't get to one of those classes, and I was like, well, I'll just go on a run outside. And I ran, I don't know, three, four miles, and I was like, oh my God, I didn't need to stop. For some reason, I had it in my head. I just didn't think I'd be able to just run. And I was like, well, that's cool. So I started running a little bit more regularly, a little bit longer distances, five, six miles. And then December of 2022, I ran a 15K race that we have here in New York. And I felt pretty good about that and it was really fun. And I was just enjoying kind of doing some longer distances. And so I was like, well, I'm going to sign up for the Philadelphia Marathon because it's kind of an easy one to get into. And I was like, you know, I kind of want to send it on this, on this running thing. And so, and I was like, well, I have 11 months to prepare, so I'll be fine. And I signed up for a half as well. I ran the, I signed up for the Brooklyn half, which was in May of 2023. So, yeah, I kind of kept running throughout that year, and I ran that half without, I would say I didn't really train for it. Like, I increased how much I was running and doing kind of more long runs, but I didn't train for it. And I, you know, it went well. I ran it in 143, and I was excited and it was good. And then I just started training for the marathon in July of that year. And like, three weeks in, things started to go badly. I was having this pain in my foot that kept on coming back, and I didn't really know what it was. So I decided to kind of call it quits on the marathon. And I thought, you know, I'll take a couple weeks off and it'll get better. And it didn't. And I finally got myself to a doctor and got an MRI, and I had a stress fracture. So it took kind of a while to recover from that. I think partially because I kind of like let it go on for a while. And yeah, so I started running again in like January of 2024. And I was, I think that kind of changed my perspective a little. I feel like we hear people say things like this all the time, right? Like an injury kind of turns like the way that you think about running a little bit. I was just, I really wanted to be a lot more intentional with it. I wanted to train properly for things and to be kind of more consistent year round and like build up slowly, which is kind of, you know, where my question stems from. And I was able to do that. I've been running consistently since then. I ran the Philadelphia Half Marathon in November, and that was great. I did like a full training cycle for it. And yeah, I mean, you know, crazy how properly training makes you get faster. I ran that in 139 and took maybe a month of, of not off, but, you know, not training. And now I'm near the end of a training cycle for a 5K, which has been really fun. And yeah, that's kind of where I am. I think I had mentioned in the e-mail that I, I've looked and I think I ran about a thousand miles in the past year. So.

Solid, about 20 miles a week. Yeah. How old are you?

I'm 25.

Okay. And what did they say about the stress fracture? Just metatarsal, stress fracture, any other notes there on cause?

I mean, I don't think they gave me like a distinct cause, but I think he said it was probably like increasing like too fast. I went, because I thought in my head that I was running like 25 miles a week. I went back and looked at like my Garmin or whatever, and I was absolutely not running 25 miles a week prior to starting that training. I was, you know, like 10 miles one week, 20 miles another, five miles another. So it was definitely not anywhere near where I thought it was. So I, and then I started a training plan that started you at 25. And like by week three, I was, you know, kind of high 20s.

Yeah. The reason I asked there is that I do think there may be something to dig into there. Oftentimes, what I find with stress fractures is that there's usually a training cause that's involved in some way. You ramped up too fast, you were going too hard and workouts were on runs instead of taking it easy and balancing that appropriately. But often there's additional causes as well. Stress fracture kind of represents a perfect storm of an injury. And it's often a mix of things that are involved and not usually just the training stimulus, which means for most people that I always encourage them to dig into the why there. And it may be a little bit difficult now since we're pretty far removed from the injury. But I do think it's something for you to just be aware of and to flag for future. So, for example, in my experience, metatarsal stress fractures are pretty rare, or at least I don't see them that often. And it often comes from somebody that's doing much higher volume and significantly overloading.

Yeah.

Unless there's some sort of biomechanical thing that's causing you to put more force into a certain part of your foot than normal. And, you know, so that could be a factor.

Yeah.

And maybe it was just, you know, maybe that's a sort of biomechanical thing that was isolated to that time, but maybe it's carrying with you. And so I think it's just something to be thinking about or aware of, and maybe even to consider some sort of PT type console about it just proactively.

Yeah.

Just to make sure that you're not loading a certain part of your foot too heavily.

I had been considering, because I did like a traditional PT for that injury, and it wasn't overly helpful, I felt like, because they weren't super clued in on like running and stuff. I was considering doing a like a like a running analysis, like a gait analysis. I don't know if you've like had any experience with that, or like know if it's like helpful.

They can be, you know, you have to definitely get somebody doing it that knows what they're doing. So, you know, often you want a PT who's really well versed in running movement and who has experience in history with that. And, you know, sometimes I think those things can be a little bit cookie cutter, so to speak, or off-the-shelf type analysis. And you don't want that. You want somebody who's really experienced looking at it. And so, yeah, if you can find that, then I think that would be something that would be a no brainer for you, given that history, because they'll be able to tell you, you know, are you doing something that's causing that particular part of your foot to load more? In which case, then we could figure out ways to unravel that with the right strength, mobility, whatever it may be.

Yeah.

Because it's also, you know, it's possible that it could come back otherwise. You know, the other things that come into play with stress fractures, and I know I'm digressing here, but I think this is important for the future, is could just be nutritional balance. You know, if there's something going on under the hood from a blood work perspective, or there's some sort of bone density challenge or something like that, those can also be factors. But I find those issues more common on bones that are higher up the leg than the foot. Usually, it's some sort of biomechanical thing that's also involved. So anyway, so I mentioned those just, you know, to kind of keep in the mind and back of your head. But often, what you ran into, because 20 miles a week, even if you go from 5 to 20, it's not a massive jump really to cause a stress fracture in the foot. So there probably was something else going on. The other variable could be some sort of weird footwear thing where, you know, you were in a shoe that was just completely wrong for you somehow. And that was causing you to load a part of the foot differently.

Yeah.

So those are some things to think about. Another related thing there, I guess, would be sometimes forefoot strikers. If you're naturally a forefoot striker, they can be more prone to metatarsal stress fractures because they load the front of the foot more heavily than somebody who lands midfoot or heel to toe.

Yeah.

So anyway, a couple of notes there to think about and just be aware of as you go forward. And I do think that if you can find some sort of form analysis, that would be a helpful step.

Yeah, definitely.

Also, I was curious, do you have a history in sport beyond running or casual running?

I have experience in the gym, but not organized sports.

Okay, cool. And so here we are training for 5K now. As you think about the sport, you know, one, why are you doing it now? What's motivating you?

Yeah, I mean, I think obviously it's wonderful to go outside and get out there. And like I said, I was in Austin. It's a great way to meet or meet new people and see new places. But I think it's kind of honestly been a little bit of an extension of like kind of moving from like college into like adulthood. It's been, you know, it's this thing where like, I don't have, all I have to do is go to work and pay my bills. No one's telling me what to do. And, you know, no one's telling me to run, but I get to. And it's just really great to have this like piece of my life that is like something that I can work on and progress on. And it just feels very like tangible and like simple. And yeah, I just, my goal is to keep running as long as I can and to do that pain free. And so I think like, you know, after that injury, I had had a period of like, you know, maybe this isn't what it's about to me. Like I do really like racing, but it's like that's not really like the goal. The goal is to just run. And I had this moment of like, maybe I don't ever need to do a marathon. You know, like I love the half marathon and like I've, you know, it was fun to me for me to do the second one because initially I had just done one and it was kind of whatever, but then the second one, I was like, no, like I have something to beat, right? And I kind of was like, maybe I just won't ever marathon train. But I don't know, I just I kind of it's a new challenge and and I think that I would I would like to do it eventually. But if it's not now, then, you know, something's calling your name. Yeah.

Do you think you like the process more than the results? Is that in a way what you're saying?

Um, I mean, it does feel really good. Like, it does feel good to feel like I've I've, you know, again, like it's just so fun to like get to the end of the race and be like, I really like I really tried really hard. Like one of my friends was at the at the Philly half I did this past fall and she was like, well, how do you feel? And I was like, honestly, I'm gassed. Like that was really hard. And she's like, well, yeah, like you ran it really fast. Why'd you run it that fast? What do you mean? That's the point. Yeah. So I do like the racing and I do like the result.

I mean, in some ways, I was testing you with the question because I don't know, we've only chatted here for what, 15 minutes, but it just seems to me like you're driven by more than just the process.

Yeah. No, I am.

Right. And so it's okay to admit that.

Yeah, it's okay.

You can admit that. And yeah, hell yeah, go out there and do your best, right? And so, you know, when I have these conversations with people about purpose, you know, oftentimes our connection to running are dual in nature in that we do it on one hand for the stress relief and the life balance and the getting outside and moving part of it that helps, you know, balance our bodies. But when you're thinking about races or thinking about signing up for a marathon, you're not doing that for those things, right? You can get the intangible life benefits without the races and without the marathon. So if somebody's dreaming about that and dreaming about it enough to email me to find out about whether they should do it, usually that means there's something more driving you. And that's okay. And it's okay to not be shy about it.

Yeah. No. And I think too, like it puts a lot more purpose into the daily, like monotonous runs. Like I, you know, I think like December and into like mid-January, I wasn't training for anything. I was just, you know, running and I was just kind of feeling whatever about it. And then I signed up for this 5k and all of a sudden it was like super fun. So, you know.

Yeah. Having the goals helps keep you out there.

Yeah.

So what if I said though, that a thousand miles in the last year still isn't a lot?

I mean, I was kind of thinking that. I think if I were to, you know, I think if that's what you said, then I mean, I'll make my own choices. But I mean, I think in the back of my mind, I'm kind of like that might not be enough. And I'll just run some other races and try to make sure that that between training time just doesn't get too low in terms of mileage.

Yeah. And I say that not to crap on it. I mean, it's great, right? Thousand is great. But ultimately, if you want to really excel and you've obviously got talent, I mean, running a 139 is amazing. If you want to really excel at it, and if you really want to do what's right by your body in training for a marathon, then you're going to be doing a lot higher volume in both race cycles as well as in between race cycles.

Yeah.

Obviously, we have to build to that. You don't want to just go from 1000 to 2000 right away.

Sure.

But to me, that would be the thing I would want you to be thinking about is like, how can I embed this in my routine so much that I create space for 40 miles a week year round?

Right. Yeah.

And again, we've got to get there gradually. We don't go from one to the other without a progression. But I paint that picture because I want to see for you, does that interest you? Does that excite you? Is that like, oh, I can see how that would work and that would be fun? Or it's like, oh, shoot, that's a lot of running.

No, it does, honestly. I mean, I think I'm at like 30 right now. And I think that's been totally manageable. And, yeah, it's been good because I think it like, I think what's kind of nice is kind of making those like medium longer runs, like a little bit longer. I feel like that feels super achievable. And yeah, just adding a couple miles onto the long run as well. And also like just doing, I think maybe an additional day of like a quick little recovery run would also be fine. And I'm usually doing like five days now. But yeah, and I think like I said, like I'm doing a different race distance now. And so I think like that I'm just doing it. Maybe I'll do like a 10K next and, you know, just I'll keep racing obviously.

Right. So mix it up. Well, you're not afraid of the work to be done.

Not really, no.

So then when you think about goals, you know, unbounded by timeline, unbounded by whether or not you think it's possible or whatever reality might tell you, what do you think about? What do you dream about?

As far as racing.

Racing, time goals, whatever it may be.

I think I want to do sub 130 in the half. And I think I'd want to do 330 in the marathon.

Okay. Well, I'm here to tell you that if you can run 130 in the half, you can definitely run 330 in the marathon. Those are, 330 marathon is easier than 130 half for sure.

Yeah.

But you're not that far away from 130. So the answer is yes, you can probably run a 130 half, and then your marathon goal should probably be, if that's your half goal, you should probably be close to 310 or 315.

Yeah.

Certainly under that BQ threshold for you, which I think is 320 now. So, or 325, whatever it is. But, yeah. So those are the things you're thinking about, which is good, which is tangible, but it's going to require work. And that work honestly starts with building a process that is embedded with more volume, just as we just talked about. Because right now, you're going to get faster at all distances just by doing that. And yeah, we can talk about speed work and what that looks like and how to coordinate speed along with these races, but that's the least important thing on your list right now. The most important thing is going from 1,000 miles in 52 weeks to 1,500, then to 2,000.

Yeah.

If you're doing that, also doing just a little bit of speed and being consistent with a thing I call strides, then you're going to get faster just from the volume.

Yeah. So as far as, yeah, I guess what would you think of as timeline for that? How long should I take to increase my volume that much? Because we're talking about doubling it, right?

Right. Right. I would think about it over a two year window.

Okay.

I would think, and let's just say, we're not looking at calendar year, we're just kind of looking at a 12 month block. And you said, if I look at the last 12 months, I was at a thousand. And if we look from now until 12 months from now, I'd want you to be at 1500. And then from that point, if everything's going well, then 2000, maybe the 12 months after that.

Yeah.

I think that would be a reasonable timeline. And the devil is a little bit in the details there in terms of how that's staged, because you've got to think about, okay, what races I'm doing and how within those 12 months I'm not really building. But it starts by just establishing a really solid baseline of five days a week where you might be doing eight miles, or building up to eight miles on the medium long run, building up to six to seven miles on a speed day, 10 to 12 on a long run, maybe longer if you were training for a half, and then a couple of three or four mile days. And that gives you, and that's something you should be doing more or less year round. Yeah, sure. Maybe there's some weeks where you're not doing it, because you're on vacation or you're recovering from a race or whatever it may be. But for the most part, that's your home base. You kind of go back to it, and then you modulate based on whatever distance you're training for.

Yeah. And then, so I know you're generally like saying, like, do like, you don't necessarily need more than one speed workout per week. Would you say that that's true across like all race distances though? Like, yes, okay.

Yeah, because the limiting factor for you is not speed. It is aerobic capacity. So we have to prioritize our time spent on that really first and primarily. And then the speed stuff comes along with it. But you only need the one, you know, the 20 percent of that to to get the stimulus you need. And that's true, especially for beginners, you know, and it's true for even the most advanced runners often as well. And once you get more advanced, you can start to layer in things, a second, you know, forms of a second workout, but it should still be largely focused on speed development, in my opinion. And we're always doing strides, you know, once a week as well, which is a very, very mini version of a speed that would be separate from your speed day, typically. So that's another stimulus. But what I would say, the answer to your question, if we were to jump to the answer, I would say at 25 years old, as somebody who's been averaging 20 miles a week, yes, you could do a marathon. You could always ramp up and do a marathon, but I would submit that you would be better off long-term waiting a little bit. Focusing on the 5K, the 10K, the half, focusing on the process of getting your volume up. And then when you get to that point of, I'm at 2,000 miles a week and I'm ready to go, then go do a marathon cycle, which will allow you to build even more volume because you're going to be doing 20 mile long runs during that type of a cycle. And you're going to have the foundation to do better in that race than if you just went and did it now. Now could you do it sooner? Sure. But I think people rushed to that, to be honest. I think I rushed to that. If I think back to my history, my second race was a marathon. I went from a 10K to a marathon over a two year period. And I had an injury myself, a stress fracture myself in that initial window. And I honestly think if I could go back, I would say, wait, be patient. There's no point. And no point in doing that, because you can get plenty of volume without doing marathon training. And marathon racing is incredibly disruptive to your consistency, because you've got a three week taper, and then you've got three weeks that you have to recover. So it kind of takes six weeks out of consistent build when the other races just don't.

Right. Yeah.

So I would say wait, and that's going to give you the better long term path. I would spend the next two years focused on volume, focused on racing those other distances, and enjoying the process of racing them. Getting that half PR down, you know, let's go from 139 to sub 135 or better. Who knows once you start adding real volume, what that's going to do. And then when you go to the marathon, you're going to have many more tools in your tool kit to go tackle that in like year three of this plan.

Yeah, I think that makes sense.

Does that type of patience scare you or put you off at all? Or it's like, oh, I can get that. That makes sense.

No, not really, because I think if that were the only race that existed, I think that would bum me out. But like, I'll do other stuff, like, you know, I think if it weren't broken up into like, yeah, like other training cycles and stuff, it would maybe get a little bit like monotonous. But no, I mean, I think that makes sense. I honestly think that that was kind of what I expected. But I just like didn't, I guess part of me, I didn't want to like feel like I was chickening out from the marathon, like, like I'm scared of it. Which I am, but you know what I mean? Like, yeah.

No, I don't think you are at all. I think you're, I think people are scared of the half, to be honest. I think people are more scared to run fast than a half because that can be as challenging, maybe even more painful than going and running a marathon and an easier effort. And I don't think that the half or running a fast 5k or 10k gets the proper respect that it should in our sport. People sort of downplay it or think that you're somehow settling or the training doesn't need to be as rigorous when really, if you're doing it right, it's as rigorous and in some ways harder because you're going faster on a lot of stuff. And then racing those distances, the kind of suffering you face is more challenging in many ways than the marathon.

Yeah, I think my peak for my, I mean, obviously it was a longer training cycle, but I think my peak for my half was, I don't know, maybe only like seven or eight miles more than the one for the 5k.

So yeah, which is the way it should be, right? I mean, you should be maintaining volume regardless, really of distance. And then in the long run really modulates what that looks like, but from 5k to half, the long run, isn't that different if you're doing it really right? You know, you should still be getting up to 14 to 16 mile long runs. When you're, you know, built to that for all of those distances, half and below. And then obviously for the marathon, we have to do more.

Right. Yeah.

And the other thing is you're in New York. So the nice thing is you've got plenty of race options, right?

Yeah.

I mean, we go race every weekend if you wanted to. Now, I don't want you to race every weekend, but I do think if you're going to do a 5k, in this window, do a couple of 5ks in this window, at least two or three weeks apart, so that you can see what you get out of that. I think when you do that first 5k in a cycle, you're faced with that anaerobic suffering, that the first time you face it, it maybe wins a little bit, but then you face it again a couple of weeks later, three weeks later, and you're more prepared for it.

Yeah.

So you can usually get a little bit more out of yourself once you get into the rhythm of that kind of suffering. So I would grab a couple of those in this window, and then maybe recover from that and focus on a fall half or something like that, or fall 10k, but really focus on that routine and that process, which we can talk about if you'd like.

Yeah. No, I mean, that makes sense. I think I am kind of intimidated by the 5k. It's like a very long sprint. Like it's, yeah, yeah.

It's 3.1 miles of suffering.

Yeah.

And a marathon is not 3.1. It's not the same. It's just not as intense.

Yeah.

So, okay. So let's talk about your routine. You said you're kind of running 5 days a week now, but what does that look like?

So, I mean, I'm in a training cycle. So I have a long run, no longer than 10, 11 right now. And I usually do a recovery day, like 3 miles, and a speed workout probably be like... It's been either like 5K pace intervals or like lactate threshold. And so that's my long run, my speed work, my recovery day, and then I'll have like another like seven-ish mile run, and then another maybe like five mile run.

And how are those days constructed relative to each other?

Yeah. Usually, it's not the same every week, but I would say usually speed work is Tuesday, Wednesday, I'll do a recovery, Thursday, like medium long run, and then like Friday, I'll do like a shorter medium run, four or five miles, and then either Saturday or Sunday, I'll do the long run.

Cool. Yeah, the only thing I would be thinking about there is if you were adding a day or moving days around, you always like to have a movement day after that long run. So on Monday, Sunday or Monday, depending on when your long run is, doing a short run, even if it were just three miles, I think would be really beneficial and would add a little bit more volume if you wanted to. So that would be another thing. But otherwise, I think the routine is well structured, and that becomes your baseline, where it's like no matter what happens, whether I have a dedicated training cycle or not, that's what my routine looks like. Keep placeholders for all of those days. Tuesday, speed. And even if you don't have a workout, fine. Do a run and do strides afterwards, or do even 20, 30 second pickups in there, just to give yourself a little bit of that speed stimulus. Wednesday is your recovery day. Thursday is medium long. You're at seven now. Would love to see that kid up to eight, even in this cycle. Saturday, Sunday long. And then Friday, another easy day. But yeah, give me one more recovery, three mile or somewhere after that long run. And you have a complete routine, I think, that then should just be basically what every week looks like, unless you're tapering, recovering, or obviously on vacation or traveling.

Yeah. And so, would you generally do like or recommend like just having a speed workout, like off-cycle?

Yeah, for sure. But it just, it doesn't have to be that specific. And I like it to be loose with plenty of recovery involved, where you're touching on some different paces, but you're getting plenty of recovery in between. You're not taxing the system overall too much. You should never have to feel like you need a big recovery from it. But even if you did just strides or you did 30-second pickups, where you're just doing like 30-second bursts periodically throughout the run, or one-minute or 90-second pickups, that kind of thing just keeps that speed alive in between, so that you're always primed so that when you do go back into more specific work, it's not as taxing.

Yeah. There's a couple of one-mile races in New York, and I've been trying to figure out how to train for that, and I have had very little luck on the internet. Do you have any suggestions on that?

Yeah. I mean, it looks a decent amount like 5K training in my world with some specific 3K and one-mile type interval stuff, especially as you get closer. That is a relatively short cycle of four to six weeks of specificity.

Yeah.

Where you're getting down to those faster paces and then being able to translate that. But you got to remember, even for a mile training, the volume matters still too. You know, the best milers in the world are doing 18-mile long runs. So you're still getting those long runs. You're still getting the medium long runs. You just end up with speed work that becomes more specific in those final six weeks where you're getting down to some one-mile re-paced repeats and that sort of thing.

OK. That makes sense.

And your long run at 10 now isn't bad, but I would love to even see that go up a little bit in this cycle for you, depending on when's your 5K?

It's in two weeks.

OK. Well, not obviously now then. We'll let that be. And then I would say, you know, find another 5K two or three weeks after that so that you've got a second bite at the Apple. But in the future for 5K or even 10K schedules, you know, I would love to see that longer and get a little bit higher at its peak.

OK, like 15 ish?

14 at a minimum. But yeah, 14 to 16 is the range I would be thinking about as long as you build to that carefully and you're not, you know, jumping from 8 to 16. Usually I get people to 10 by building a mile a week. And then from there, you can kind of build by two a week with usually we cycle, you know, two ups and a down in order to make sure you're not building too rapidly. But in speed cycles, we significantly benefit from the longer runs as well because it gives us the staying power to use our speed when it hurts. So there you go. What other questions can I answer for you?

I think the one thing that I sometimes struggle with in training is keeping strength as consistent because I'm always confused as to like what day to do it. I think it's generally like speed workout day, you would do strength. I'm always so tired.

There's sort of two rules on this. First rule, which I think is optimal, is to keep their hard days hard and your easy days easy. So I like doing it in your schedule Tuesday and Thursday after the runs, either right after or later in the day. I do mine at lunch basically after those Tuesday, Thursday workouts and medium long runs when I'm in training. And that, you know, yeah, there's a little bit of an adaptation initially to that kind of load, but then that allows your recovery days to be focused on recovery. The biggest thing there is just making sure you're really thinking about fueling properly, so that you're able to have sustained energy and hydrate, of course, you're able to have sustained energy through both of those workouts. And then, yeah, there's a little bit of an adaptation to it, but then you get used to it. And I found it helps balance that hard and easy the best. So that's sort of optimal in rule one. Rule two is if that doesn't work or you don't have the time, because some people just can't do both in a day from a scheduling standpoint, then it's just a matter of pick two other days where you think you can do it consistently and then stick to it, because the body will adjust to whatever routine you give it. And then on those days, if it happened to be like Wednesday and Friday, for example, great, just do that after your runs on those days, if they're shorter runs. But yeah, but that's a part of your routine too. So you ideally run and have the defined purpose for each run on the given days that we just talked about. And then the strength fits in on top of that. And as closely as you can, you keep that routine year round. Obviously things happen. We have to move stuff around all the time. That's not a big deal. But the body remembers that routine and it becomes easier to execute as you go.

So, I mean, I will say sometimes I'll wake up on Tuesday and I'm not feeling overly strong, so I'll flip that with my Thursday or something. Do you find that it's quite important to have the days kind of locked relatively?

I think it's important, yes, because again, the body kind of recognizes that routine. Now, there's always reasons to adjust. And then it's just a question of how do I make a reasonable adjustment that doesn't compromise something else? So, for example, if you were feeling under the weather and you had a Tuesday workout planned and you just were like, oh, this isn't happening today, it's better for you to skip that or just do an easy run on that day. That is a good decision that you should pat yourself on the back about. Now, the question then is what do I do with that speed workout? And if you were to move it to, in your case, Thursday and flip it with your medium long run date, that might actually be totally fine because you've got the Friday kind of easy day as well before your long run to recover. But if, you know, if you were then not feeling good on Thursday and you moved it to Friday before your long run on Saturday, that would be a bad choice. You gotta make sure that you maintain the integrity of the sequence between hard and easy. Otherwise, we have a problem. And so sometimes it's better for people, if they're not feeling good on a certain day, to just say, all right, I'm going to run easy, I'm going to skip the workout, and then I'm going to pick up with my meeting long run on Thursday and then long run Saturday and keep going from there. Sometimes that's a better choice, because we don't want to do makeup things, especially if it starts to compromise the integrity of the schedule or the sequence of the work, because that's when we start to get injured or we do something that our body doesn't like.

Yeah, makes sense.

So, there you go. Anything else will you have me?

I think that's about it.

All right.

I have your trove of podcast episodes.

Right, all 372 others.

I mean, it's great. You put a lot of the info in the title, so I can, you know.

Yes, and there, you know, if you have keywords, you can, I don't know if people know this, but there's, I do have a website for my podcast, which is Running Rogue, spelled R-O-G-U-E, people often screw that up, dot libsyn, libsyn.com. If you go to that site, you can search at the top and take out keywords, and it's an easy way to find episodes. That's often how I find them when people ask me, have you done something on this?

Yeah.

And I'll just go there because I don't necessarily remember all of the episode numbers. I do remember some. But anyway, but that's a good way to find them if you need those reference points. But I appreciate the conversation because I get this one a lot. And I think oftentimes I think people jump to the marathon, not that it's wrong or bad to jump to the marathon too soon, but I do think it potentially compromises what you can do in that first marathon. And there's just, if you have no rush, why rush?

Yeah.

Let's build that long-term base, that platform that's going to allow you to do more once you get there.

I actually do have a question about that. I don't remember who it was, but some running coach kind of said something about your first marathon, like your goal should be to finish. And I find that I don't know that I would be able to do that. Like I feel like I would still have like, I would have a time goal, like even if I, you know, what are your thoughts? Yeah.

I mean, I want people to finish, I want people to finish strongly. Those are the two goals I have for first time marathoners. To me, that requires having at least a target time, where you know what you're capable of, you have a plan, you're going out to run a specific target time. Now that might be a slightly conservative, which I do recommend, slightly conservative target relative to what we think your potential fitness is. But you still have a target, because in order to finish strong and have a good race, you have to race smart.

Yeah.

And that requires having a plan and knowing what you're capable of. So yes, I would want you to have a target time for sure. And we don't want to grasp, I think, too tightly onto specific time goals for that first one, because that misses the point.

Yeah.

Because what you run in that first one will be irrelevant versus how you run it, I believe, over time as you get better and faster. But sure, you want to have a plan, you want to have a target time. I think if you don't, then it usually ends up coming back to bite you because you go too fast and then things crash.

Yeah.

So yes, target time for sure. Loosely grasp around a goal. But to the extent that you're more prepared going in with all of this base work, I think you can be a little bit more rigorous with those goals in the first race.

Yeah. Makes sense.

So there you go. All right, Marisa, well, this has been super helpful and this is a question I get a lot, so hopefully it will help a lot of others.

Yeah.

So thanks for sharing your story.

Yeah.

Yeah. Really appreciate it.

Yep.

So there you go, Marisa Everywon from New York. Thanks to her for coming on. Thanks to all of you for listening. If you're interested in jumping on and this type of conversation, you can always email me, chris at roguerunning.com, or you can check us out at roguerunning.com for more info on our training or follow us on Facebook or Instagram at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.