Hey everybody, welcome to episode 392 of the Running Rogue Podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung, coming to you back from the studio, the in-home studio after a week away. James is here with me. James, how are you?

Doing good. How about you?

Doing well. It's a nice day outside here in Austin. We're talking about some bread and butter today as we continue to step into the tactics of executing your training program. We've covered this a little bit already in recent episodes, but we're going to be talking about periodization, how you break down the training cycle into smaller chunks so that you can work on each necessary skill set in turn so that you can peak on race day. Last week, we talked about macro cycle planning, sort of planning the big picture, and now we're talking about planning within a training cycle. What do those periods look like? There's actually five of them, one that we often forget to mention, but we're going to talk about today. And so while we start on a little bit of an intro topic I have, you can think about maybe in your head what five we might be talking about, because oftentimes you just hear us talk about four. But anyway, I have a little bit of an intro topic for us that might be a little bit controversial, we'll see. But I just feel like I've had it on my mind, I've got to talk about it, got to get it out, so to speak, and I want to get your reaction. So recently, I've been really, really annoyed by one specific aspect of the running influencing wave trend community. Love our running influencers out there because they are bringing people to the sport. And there's certain aspects of it that I don't love, but hey, perhaps the ends justify the means. We get more people to the sport. That's a good thing, right? Well, there's one particular thing that I just have to comment on, I want to get your reaction on, which is that there are some influencers out there, and I won't name any names, that for whatever reason, refuse to use their chip time when they're reporting their race results. Instead, they're using their watch time based on when they cross the line at 13.1 or 26.2. And that time is going to be very different depending on various variables. And yet, for whatever reason, they just can't seem to accept that their chip time might be slower than what their watch says. And I've just got beef with it. It's just frustrating to me. There's a lot of things that we're accepting that they're bringing into our world, people filming themselves all the time, yelling out their mouth splits into their phone every mile marker, get ready with me's, all those things. And yes, while they're not for me, I understand that they're bringing people to sport. So I'm going to say, hey, it's cool. It's innovation. It's new. It's bringing some new energy to the sport. I love it. But this one thing, I'm like, hey, we have a standard by which we measure race times that predates you, that predates really all of us. And it's this idea that you have official results for a reason. And for those of us that are in the main field, sort of the back of the pack, and it's chip time. That is the standard at this point. For those that are at the very front, the elites, it's gun time. It's whatever that gun says, regardless of when they cross the line. And those are the standards. So can we just, when we're talking about it, just use those times instead of what your watch says? Guess what? Your watch is wrong. And we're measuring based on a standard. And so I just have beef with it. I had to just get this PSA out there. If you're running influencer and you're listening, please, please, for the love of all things, then just use your chip time.

Yeah. I think for all of Rogue Nation or all those that have been connected to your podcast, love's a good Chris rant. Like I like when you get fired up. I don't share the same beef, and I do have a thought on it that came to mind, because just so you guys know, Chris did say he'd put me on the spot. So I have a thought, but I have to go with what my most genuine, honest self would typically say in a moment like this. And I'm like, why does that bother you? What do you think it is? What gets under your skin?

Because it's inaccurate. And I feel like they're doing it to try to present themselves in a better way. And that's just silly. Like, hey, be who you are. Everybody else is operating under that standard. If you're getting a PR, you're not choosing it based on what your garment says. You're choosing it based on what the actual race results say. And that is the appropriate standard by which to judge these things. And yet I feel like they're using this fake number to quote, look better when all the rest of us are using the appropriate standard. So, and that just annoys me because it's inauthentic. And I think it also sets a bad standard for everybody else out there who's trying to measure themselves in this sport.

Yeah, so that's what I was thinking. I was like, if I trickled down really fast, as low as I could go, I was like, it sits at the word dishonesty. And that should bother people, right? And so I would almost turn it into like a recommendation for influencers. I'm like, by doing that, you're bringing in far more skepticism than even necessary, because the truth is whoever's already following you really doesn't care about a minute or two or seconds or whatever like little blemish you think you're protecting, whether subconscious or consciously and intentionally. Either way, you're bringing attention to it now, because you're intentionally breaking the norm, which grabs the attention of someone like yourself or me or others. And now you're getting like a skeptical lens put on you that's like, dude, you're inviting that upon yourself. So I'm in agreement with you, but I'm trying to flip it into something that's like, man, you're like, you're making people feel this feeling of distrust. Like, hmm, can I distrust you for something that's so stupid and small? It's like, I don't know, I would say to the influencers that do that, you're doing yourself an incredible disservice, case in point, right now.

Well, and I also feel like they have a responsibility that is greater, right? If people are looking to them to be influenced, to make changes with their training, to use certain brands, to wear certain clothes, whatever, you have a responsibility with that, that you become a role model of sorts. And in that responsibility, there are certain areas where you need to actually show people how it's done the right way. So what are we supposed to say? It's like, OK, well, now there is no standard by which we measure people's results. It's just whatever you want it to be. Crop your watch however you want. And if there are buildings that are getting in the way, or if you're having to run more because, you know, you're in a crowded corral, then who cares? You get to pick your own time. Everybody gets their own standard, and then it's just a free-for-all. So it's like, I feel like you have an obligation as an influencer to set the tone, to be a role model, to actually follow certain standards that matter. And there's a reason that they're out there. It's so that we can have one way by which we measure these things, so that everybody can then keep records of their performances and beat them in a way that's standard. Because if you're judging by your watch, and you're in a Chicago, and the first mile is through a tunnel, your GPS watch is going to be wrong. It just is. Or in Austin, where you start downtown, versus if you were in a smaller place. So it's just, it's crazy to me that somehow, because of this need to keep up perceptions, or maybe it's just an ignorance, maybe it's just a misunderstanding of how it all works. But in any case, I'm here to say, there is a standard. Use it. Set the right example for everybody else that is being influenced by you. And look, we're going to love you anyway. I mean, there was one particular influencer who raced in Austin, again, I won't name names, ran the half at, quote, party pace with her friends, and then posted a time that was a minute faster than her actual result. Why? What? You were running a pace that you admittedly said was just for fun. So why are you feeling like you have to put something out there that's not real? It just doesn't make sense to me. So, yeah, if you're going to influence people, let's do it in the right ways.

Yeah. And what's sad is they're leaving something on the table, too, because if you make that habit, that's already what people who are following you are struggling with. And so you tell someone how badass you are, you might draw tens. You tell someone how you struggled. You show someone your scars. You draw hundreds. So it's not even like you're not even actually like doing yourself a service in your reach, which is the whole name of your game. Like, yeah, there is. I don't want to share your...

There is this new Instagram account. It's so ridiculous that I don't even know the name. It's an acronym like IUIDA something. I mean, I'm going to get it wrong. It's this basically this Instagram account that has been created specifically to call influencers out on this.

Oh, on this particular note.

This particular thing. Like, hey, no, that's not what you read. The results say this. And to me, that's going a little bit far. It's like, okay, I don't need another anti-influencer, calling everybody out. But it's just had gotten to a point where I'm just like, this is absurd. And it kind of speaks to the thing that I struggle with in the whole influencing content creator world, which is that there is this temptation to not keep it real because you're trying to keep up a certain look and stand certain look and perception. And that's where I really struggle with it. And this is kind of the where the rubber meets the road for me on this when it comes to running standards and then not being authentic about who you really are. And again, as you said, no one's judging you based on a minute, two minutes, three minutes here or there. Obviously, right. So just just use your chip time. Use your chip time. Save us all a headache. Save me some some frustration. And let's just all keep it real because that is the standard by which we're measured on a race course. So there you go. How about that for a little?

I love it. I was going to say I don't Easter egg. I don't share the same degree of frustration, but I am in agreement with everything that you said. Like, I think when I see those things, I'm like, mm, loss for you. And then I just move on.

Just to kind of put a positive note on it, a lot of people will bemoan, traditionalists in the sport like me will bemoan the influencer wave in our sport because of whatever. And while I share some of those frustrations on a smaller scale, I do think for the most part, it's a good thing. It's bringing people to the sport. And yes, it might be a different way to do that than we're used to. But kudos, right? And I coach some people that would be in the content creator influencer world. Love them all. I'm not throwing stones at any person in particular, or the job, so to speak, in general, because I do think they've done mostly good for our sport. But there's just this one little thing that's just eating at me. I had to get out.

Just do it honest.

So there you go. So there you go. And the irony is, of course, I'm probably preaching to the choir here, because I don't think any of these folks are listening to my podcast. You might be making this choice, but maybe they'll hear it somehow. Or we can clip it in, put it on our Instagram. All right.

That's been behind it. That's our new campaign.

That's right. I don't I don't really care enough about it to go that far, but it's been eating at me. So I had to get it out, and I figured it would be a fun way to start.

That was. I actually really enjoyed that.

A fun way to start the episode. Kind of breaking the mold from our traditional very serious content. All right. So that's my intro beef. And here we go. We're going to talk about periodization today. This is one of those topics that we talk about a lot, that we allude to a lot. The language that we're going to talk about, we use a lot. So you're going to hear these things come up again and again. We've already talked about some of these things in prior episodes, especially when we're talking about peaking. And if you go back to listening to me all the way from the beginning, December 2016, then these are terms you're going to have heard a lot. So we're going to talk about the five periods of a complete training block or complete training macro cycle to carry the language forward from last week. Before we get there, just want to set the context a little bit and ask, okay, well, what is periodization? What is a period and why do we do it that way?

I know we'll dig into some of the specifics in the science, but I'll just start really broad and just say, I remember this helped me memorize it as well as it made it easy dialogue with athletes. And that's like, hey, there's periods to your training. There's different phases or different periods, just like there's seasons to a year. So we know there's four seasons in a year. Okay, there's going to be five seasons. The four messes it up. But I'm just saying, there's different seasons in a year. So it's like, yes, it's all one calendar year, and yet there's different phases or seasons in it. Same with training. It's like, there's one big macro, and then there's different periods. And then, do you want to get into the specific periods, or do you want me to just-

We'll get into the specific periods, but I just want to, I guess, be thorough about the reason why we sequence it in this way. And we covered this on our peaking episode, where we talked about, essentially, you have to prepare the human body for a peak race in sequence in order to not only get the most out of it, but also to make sure that you don't break yourself along the way. So just like we've used the analogy, layers of a cake or layers of a pyramid, it's that concept where you're in sequence building the foundational elements of what you need so that you can take the next logical step in training, and then that way you're ready to go when it matters on the day that you've chosen as your A-race. And so it's about that, and then obviously we'll get into the specifics of each phase, but I just want to make sure that people understand why we do it. It's not arbitrary. It's not because it makes a nice moniker about naming things or anything like that. It's truly because we want to make sure we're stepping through the process of preparing the body in the right way. And if we skip steps, then you break, or we skip steps and then you're not ready to perform at peak when it matters. And this all goes back to our core coaching inspiration, Arthur Lidyard, who is from New Zealand in the 50s and 60s. He took some athletes from there and basically through process of, not elimination, but basically trial and error, started working through what it looks like to build a training cycle. He obviously had influences from various places, including the Finnish athletes at the time. But then he figured out, hey, this is how we prepare the body in order to make sure that we're ready to go when it matters. Interestingly, as a side note, he had milers and marathoners in his training system, and their training would look almost identical for the first 15 weeks or so. And then it would diverge at the end in what we call the race-specific phase. And that was one thing that was very revolutionary at the time, and I think would still be considered revolutionary in a sense that if you told people that, hey, for a miler and for a marathoner, we're going to prepare you in the same way for the first 12 to 15 weeks of your training, people would be like, what? How does that work? When that's actually how it's done if you look at it from a core principle perspective.

And I think us now knowing that even a mile is still aerobic, that makes so much sense, but I don't think he had... I actually am not sure where the science was at that time, like if he had that level of science.

I don't think he had the science. I think he just realized that through experimentation on his own body and his own athletes, that he could get the best out of a miler and get the best out of a marathoner by starting the training in the similar ways. And then he proved it out on the Olympic stage. Yeah, with medals in the whole, on the whole spectrum. But today, you know, it's interesting. Right now, for a lot of our athletes here in Austin, we shift into commonly a speed track or a speed-focused block of training in the spring because most of the good 5Ks and 10Ks in Austin are in the spring, April and May time frame. And naturally coming off of Houston or Austin, or they've done a longer race in January or February, you can pivot and then gear up for 5Ks and 10Ks. And it's interesting because a lot of people, when they do that, when they make that shift, they think, oh, okay, now I get to run less volume. It's like, well, maybe not. And yes, the long run is different, but all of the fundamentals that got you to your best marathon are actually gonna get you to your best 5K and 10K as well. And so that's one interesting part about the periods is that it is basically built for any distance if you're talking about endurance racing, which as you said, is a mile and above. And so all of these same periods apply and it just gets specific really in that race specific phase. So I think we've preamble enough on the why and what of periodization. Let's dig into the five, count them five.

Wait, I know you just said we preamble quite a bit, but I just feel compelled to say this. Like I think, and especially for the American audience, it's like, I don't think we're not just grabbing Lyddiard because he's this random cool guy out in New Zealand. And it's like, oh, this is different. I don't think people appreciate his impact on Bill Bowerman. Bowerman being the coach of Pree, and Bowerman being the coach of Phil Knight, who founded Nike. So fellow co-founder of Nike, coach of the great Steve Pree Fontaine, and a lot of people know his name in causing the jogging boom or the running boom in the 60s in the US. And so when we think of our love of science and everything, we're still in love with science. We're talking about the science today. But as we were talking about the whole idea of this guy out in New Zealand just experimenting, it's like the ripple effect this guy has had, I think is just terribly underappreciated. And I felt like it was worth saying that on the impact.

I mean, he's the father of modern distance coaching at the elite level. And yes, we've learned, we've modified, we tweaked, people have different versions of it. But at the core, most of what any professional elite runner is doing goes back to Arthur Lyddiard's principles. And there's other components to that as well. But he is one of the founding fathers of really all of the best distance training, which has now been fully backed up by science, but at the time was more experiential and experimental as much as anything. Okay, so the five periods, let's see, you can name them quickly in your head before we get into them. We're gonna just quickly talk about each period, why we do it, what we're trying to accomplish, and give a little bit of examples about what you're doing inside each period. And again, some of this is recap, but it is so fundamental and foundational that it never hurts to cover this stuff again. We start with the first period, which has got three different names that we sometimes use, and I'm gonna give them all, just so that you're not confused when we happen to bring out a different one. But this is, as the book calls it, the speed development phase. We also sometimes call this the priming phase or the base phase is what is commonly referred to in general run coaching vernacular. So this is the first phase, speed development, priming, base. Originally in the vernacular, you would most commonly hear people talk about the base phase because that's when you're building the base volume, the base aerobic system. But that became a little bit of a misnomer in a sense. And so people have evolved to use these two other terms that we're going to reference the speed development phase or the priming phase to also note that in this foundational phase where you're building volume, you're also having to stay connected to speed so that when you do shift gears into more rigorous speed work, you're not suddenly left lacking. And so this is a period where you're getting fit enough to train, as we like to say, working on base volume, but also sprinkling in just enough speed development work or priming work so that when we do get to the more rigorous, longer, longer speed work, you're ready to do it without breaking. So I'll pause there. Commentary on speed development, priming, base.

I was just thinking about the style of workouts, but yeah, I guess to reemphasize there, like even though we always try to simplify in the name of making it somewhat black and white so people could take notes, look at it, understand it, apply it, and then feel like they're empowered to kind of think on their toes. But yeah, like I was thinking of when you were mentioning, we still want to touch on some speed. It's like, okay, yes, the primary in that phase is like growing the volume, but it doesn't mean that there aren't secondary and tertiary priorities that can also be mixed in. And so I guess where I'm going with that is that, yes, you're in doing some qualities, but the precision around them shouldn't be so nerve wracking or high pressure because it's, hey, I'm introducing the speed while I'm really primarily focused on growing volume here and ramping up into my system.

Volume. And then what we would call that is neuromuscular stimulus is more important than anything. So you're doing workouts where you're tapping on speed, but usually with plenty of recovery. And if you don't have any other foundational speed work in advance of that, then you're just doing strides to introduce that in a gentle way so that you don't break while you're introducing speed. So this phase is about building volume, introducing a little bit of neuromuscular stimulus. That's what we like to call speed development. And really focusing on the FV, part of our FBI framework, frequency, volume, intensity. Really the F and the V are the primary, the frequency, establish a routine, the volume, build your overall weekly volume. Not that you'll get to your peak in this phase, but you will get to a volume that's significant enough that you're then prepared to step into that intensity segment where you're going beyond just speed development into more intense workouts. We like to say that a 10-mile long run is an example distance of that where you would get to that threshold, but that I think is also going to be a little bit dependent on the individual and what their ramp schedule looks like and also what their history has been. But anyway, those are the things, volume and a little bit of speed development. What, when it comes to workouts in this priming speed development phase, other than strides, what would they look like?

You actually have a lot of variety in this phase, and to keep it specifically on speed development, that can be hill sprints, 200s, 100s, you can do 400s. So like you said, with big recoveries, it can be a fart like even if someone's out on country roads and they need to, you can look at equivalent times of 200s and 400s. I always told myself when coaching that if I was limited by environment, I would just remind myself, remember, every workout is a fart like. Because once you add up the times, you're like, oh yeah, I guess as long as it's continuous, if the recoveries are in motion, then everything's a fart like, because you can look at the times. So it's like, it's power and it's speed. So like 200s, 400s, 800, I mean, I'm sorry, hill sprints, et cetera. And then I do have an exception that I'll tack in there where I put in other workouts, but they're not necessarily speed development. So I can save that or let you respond. So what I also do and consider, like I think in this priming phase is that we're also keeping a close eye. Like the primary focus is to focus on speed development. So that's why we started with like hills, 200s, short, fast, long recoveries. However, I also think of the concept of progression overload. And I know that if in the aerobic strength phase, we have ATLT work coming or lots of threshold and tempo work, so like half marathon pace, you know, I don't want that to feel like a shock. So to smooth the transition in between, you know, I also will put in mile repeats, but I'll assign something like steady state. So it's an effort based, it's general, it's not tied on the parameters. But you know, sometimes I might do like, let's say in the intro of a couple of weeks, I might do, you know, 200s, 400s, and then a straights and curves for a down week. So you get these 100 meter. Well, the following week, I could do hill sprints followed, these are two up weeks, followed by three to five by a mile at steady state. Because I'm thinking, yeah, I'm mostly focused on speed development, but I know these longer duration workouts are going to come. So I can sprinkle in between some of these speed development workouts, workouts that are going to prep. So I might even include 1200s at half at some point, because I'm like, hey, you're just touching on familiarity with the pace. We're stretching you out of 200 and 400 holds into something like a 1200, which feels a little more daunting and annoying. But then I'll follow up with words like, and I don't care if you hit the numbers or not. And I think at moments like that, the athlete might think like, no, I'm here trying to do my best. I want to hit the number. And I'm like, but did you just hear the intention, the reason behind it? We're not looking for precision yet. We're just getting your body ready to handle longer tempo, threshold, aerobic endurance, and aerobic strength workouts. And so it's like, as the coach or in the design of the program, you're kind of thinking about two things. Primarily, if we wanted to keep it simple, focus on the speed development. Someone could just go hills, 200s, hills, 400s, like they could keep it black and white, or they could just run quarters as their quality for that whole time. I just think we're missing a little, like just one or two percent better, is to say also look ahead, see what's coming, and prime the body for that which is to come.

You would call that a broken tempo type of workout, where instead of doing a long continuous tempo or long continuous lactate threshold workout, you're doing it in small chunks. So that you're priming the system for the longer tempo or threshold work to come. But it still fits into the definition. And I think, to me, one of the things to consider here is, what is it not? Like, how do I know if I'm doing it wrong? And one of the ways you've already referenced would be, if I'm looking for too much precision, I'm being really specific about my paces, you're doing it wrong. No, you should be doing it in a way that's effort-based, that allows you to work into it, feel like you got a stimulus, but without really any specificity. You're also doing it wrong if, at any point in these workouts outside of the intervals, you're starting another interval again with a really elevated heart rate. Typically, we want not complete back to resting heart rate recovery, but you want full recovery essentially between intervals in these priming workouts, where either you're getting, if you're doing short intervals like 200s or 400s, you're getting enough recovery in between perhaps equal distance. We like a good 200 on, 200 off workout, so that by the time you start the next interval, your heart rate is more or less recovered. Or in the case of a broken tempo, you might be doing a longer interval, but because the efforts are lower or lower intensity, then you're able to recover on a couple of minutes rest before you jump back into the next one. But you never want to be at that point where you're like, oh man, recovery is almost over. Like, what am I going to do? I'm not ready. You know, like if you get to that point in a workout in this phase of the game, you're doing too much. And as I like to always remind people, take more recovery if you need it. You have the ability to flex that. If you ever get to a point where your heart rate feels like it's still elevated or out of control before you start the next rep, take more time. Pause. It's okay. We're loose and flexible in this phase. So there you go. That's speed development, priming base. All the while, you're building your volume. We like to, you know, some people like to use the rule 10% per week, not more than that, from one week to the next, if you're building your volume. I like to actually translate it into hard numbers, you know, like two to four miles a week is sort of the, the absolute numbers I like to see most people build by, depending on what their starting point is, makes it really easy to do the math. It's like, all right, I'm gonna bump by two to three miles a week. And if you're doing that while you're building in this base phase, then you're probably doing it in a way that's manageable. Okay, next phase, phase two, strength phase. This is a little bit of a misnomer as well, in a sense. We're talking about aerobic strength primarily here. We're not talking about muscular strength, although there is a component of that built into this phase with longer hill intervals. Well, this is aerobic strength, or another word for that is endurance. Another way to say it in phrase form is staying power. Essentially, the next thing we want to build is the ability for the body to sustain slightly uncomfortable pieces for longer and longer periods of time, setting the foundation for the next phase. So in this phase, that's what we're trying to accomplish. Usually, we're doing that with longer threshold, tempo type intervals, or we're doing it with longer hill intervals versus short hill sprints, because we're also, when we're doing the hill intervals, we're building some muscular strength as we progress through this phase of work to build the resilience of the muscles as we continue to build intensity of speed. So that's what the aerobic strength phase is about. I'll pause there.

I was just thinking of types of workouts. Like I was thinking, for some reason, I was stuck on hills. Hills not only give you that strength that you were just saying, but if, you know, like in the priming phase and speed development, if you're thinking of a hill workout there, I like using something like 8 to 12, 30 second hill sprints where they're like short, hard, and it's a steep hill. And I don't go search the great of the hill. I can eyeball it around town. We've got Rainbow Hill over there by Peace Park. And my athletes will know that if any of them are listening. They'll smile right now. They'll smile and then they'll immediately frown.

It's not rainbows and unicorns over there.

No, nothing sweet and lovely about it whatsoever. But then, very close to it, we have a longer, slowly gradual, slow and gradual build into the great of the hill. And that's where we, in the aerobic strength phase, we might use something like Kim Rinkle's 30, 60, 90 hills, where they start at 30, which is familiar, and they've already touched on, and then extend it to 60, and then come back down smooth, and then extend it to 90. So, I like using that word extend, because mathematically, they can see, oh, it's extending by 30 seconds each time, and I want them conceptually in that mind frame of extension. Like, man, how do I take that pace? I can run hard and fast, but when I'm in a half marathon, I want to know it's holding through 11, and I want to know it's holding through 12, and holding through 13. You can reflect that in the hills, like 30, 60, 90, and then a lot of what we talked about, I feel like it was, no, two weeks ago, when we were getting into tempo definitions and everything, love working that middle gear here. It doesn't matter if I love it or not. That's what's called for in this phase.

So required. This phase requires that threshold tempo work that we talked about a couple of episodes ago. Aerobic threshold, tempo, as we like to call that middle zone of the lactate curve, and then lactate threshold before you get to that anaerobic place or right before, right on the edge of that. So all of that falls in here as well. Sometimes you might do that work on a flat course. Sometimes you might do it on a slightly hilly course. But these are the two types of workouts you're primarily seeing in this strength phase. It's longer hill intervals and threshold oriented work somewhere in that spectrum from aerobic threshold to lactate threshold. Sometimes we like a good combo too, or you might mix in both. We have the Lumberjack Twist, which is a famous kind of combo workout that we use here at Rogue, where you do hill intervals, and then we'll do either AT or LT work in between, and then go back to the hills. Or there's another one of my favorites, which is what I call Hills Plus Tempo. You do a couple of hill wraps, two to three, and then you do a tempo 800, and then you go back into the hill wraps and repeat that for multiple rounds. So that's a way to combine the two, where you're generating the fatigue from the hills so that you have to work on that staying power a little bit more specifically when it comes to the tempo or the aerobic threshold work. So those are some favorites as well. But it should really be all about that staying power. You're not finding God here. You're not going to the edge. You're not vomiting on these workouts. You're typically building into them in progression, staying a little bit sub-max on the hills if you're doing hill intervals, being very careful about managing your effort in a progressive way in threshold work. So you're always holding the back a little bit and focused instead of pressing the edge on that relaxation and being smooth and in control at these efforts.

Yeah, I like that hold back. It's like hold back and sustain is good language. I think if a coach is writing a program and he or she is torn between two workouts, it's like which one holds back potentially but stretches them in volume there. So like sitting in those windows longer as opposed to getting too fired up about like, ooh, but this is fast, sharp and sexy. And so I want to, it's like, nope, stick to that language of hold back and stretch.

Yeah, and this is going to be, you know, priming phase, depending on your starting point, might be five to seven weeks. Strength phase is going to be six to eight weeks, typically making sure that you have enough time to build this aerobic foundation. And if you have extra time in your training block, to me, you add it in priming and in strength and not necessarily in race specific, because once you get to that race specific phase, you're climbing to the peak quickly and you want to be cautious about staying there too long. So all extra time in your macro cycle would go into these first two phases. Whereas the other ones are more narrow, so to speak, more specific and more dangerous, in a sense, if you get too greedy. So that's aerobic strength. Our second phase, third phase, race-specific phase. So this is the phase where you want to ask yourself, okay, what does this race require? Typically, what we're focused on in this phase is making sure that you can run race pace efficiently. And there's, in my mind, kind of two components of that. One is running race pace, because you want to be able to dial in to your appropriate pace, regardless of what distance you're trying to tackle. And two, you're also wanting to make race pace feel even easier. So you're wanting to find efficiency at race pace, which means you have to run faster than race pace in order to make race pace feel efficient. So typically, for marathoners, we're working on marathon pace during this cycle, and we're working on 10K pace as a pace that's faster, that allows marathon pace to feel easier. And for half marathoners, we're going to have marathon pace and 5K pace often in this cycle for half marathoners so that you can make half marathon pace feel more efficient. And there's various versions of that depending on which race distance you're trying to accomplish. And just like before, with kind of combo strength workouts, there's also combos where you're doing both. And some of our favorite workouts are in-and-out workouts where you're working in and out of race pace at exchanging those with faster paces to make race pace feel like you're recovering. And therefore building confidence as well as aptitude at those paces. So that's what Race Pacific Face is all about. Pretty straightforward, but this is the first time in these about six weeks or so, might be six or seven weeks, where you're really, really focused on race pace. Not before that, but now, yes, you have permission.

Now you finally get to go.

Now you get to go. So give us some examples of workouts in this phase of work.

This is, I think, the most fun phase because nothing's necessarily off the table. Like you said, we still want to keep that speed alive, so we're touching faster paces so we can still hit them hard with speed, but it's either rotating, like I might like to do something where it's like a five mile progression run for, let's say, up week one, because there's two up weeks and then a down week. So for up week one, you can do something like a five mile progression run, starting slightly slower than marathon pace, hitting marathon pace right in the middle, and finishing slightly faster. So not only is it basically circling around that bullseye on the target of MGP, but we're also allowing them to run through it, which gives them that satisfaction of finishing faster, kind of abiding by the shrub rule of progressing through workouts, but it's also like a microcosm of race day itself. And then the next week, we could hit 800s at 10k, just to say like, hey, are you still sharp, and is MGP gonna feel really easy? So there's a lot of variety on what we could do on the speed portion the next week. But you know, that's a nice little combo to tee up that I think is simple and easy to replicate, something to that effect. But then I also love, like in the marathon programs, you can use the Michigan in a lot of spots, the way we set it up here at Rogue, but I love using it here because it's what you mentioned. It's like, you're gonna get on the track and do like 8 to 1200 at like your 10K pace, and then go hit one to two miles of race pace on the road. And so we're teaching the athlete, bam, you see your speed, it's there, you got it. But this is what we're really working. Can you recover at this race pace? And then you send them back to the track and they hit 800 again at 10K, like to end with like a 400 at 5K, but it just repeats that. It's like track work, then out on the road for long duration, track work, out on the road, track work one last time, really fast, and then back out on the road. I think that's almost like, there is no ideal, but that's one of the closest, the workouts that can get closest to me, that's ideal for a race-specific phase.

It's one of those combo workouts we referenced where you're going faster pace in and out with race pace so that race pace feels more comfortable. And it's amazing what can happen when you've built the cake the right way, and you get to that point, and you look at some of those workouts on paper, and you think, man, that looks really hard. How am I going to go 10K pace to marathon pace with very little recovery? And then you do it, and you're like, oh man, I'm actually feeling like I'm getting energy back in marathon pace and recovering so that I can hit the track again. And that's when you build real confidence. Some of those workouts, they look hard on paper, but if you sequence the work the right way, they're actually much easier than they look, and then you come away with it, like man, I'm ready. So love a good in and out workout. This is also a phase, and it might start at the end of the strength phase, but also in this phase, we're going to be working on long run workouts. So you're going to be building pace work into your long runs in order to replicate that feeling of running race pace on fatigued legs. Oftentimes for at least two out of the three long run workouts, we like to also work in other paces as well. So you might actually go a little bit faster and then get into marathon pace and kind of in and out, so that we're building that aptitude of running race pace, finding speed also on tired legs. Because yes, you're going to be running marathon pace or half marathon pace for a long time, but hopefully if you execute well, you're closing faster. So you want to be able to not just hit race pace, but also hit faster than race pace on tired legs. And we'll do that in our long run workouts. One of the things that I want to address here, just as a side note, because I think it's important, is some people might ask the question, well, why are we only focusing on marathon pace for six weeks? When, you know, a lot of people, I think, intuitively think, well, I should be running marathon pace from the beginning, right? Some people will do it in the extreme way by running their long runs at marathon pace as they build. They just add a mile or two, and they're just going from eight miles at marathon pace to 20 miles at marathon pace. We don't do that. We polarize more than that. And I just want to remind people the why. Why is this such a narrow focus inside the bigger picture?

I'm thinking of a lot of reasons. One, it's like specificity of training. You asked that question of what is the event demand? What have we been preparing for? So it's like we used those priming workouts and all that aerobic strength to lead you in here, to ultimately make that pace feel sticky, feel like home. There's also a synchronicity to muscle contraction, so it's good to like quote find that rhythm and make it sticky and feel as though that's the one pace I seem to dial into no matter what. So it's very race specific. It's what we've been building towards this whole time. And then the speed workouts, we're trying to sandwich them around them such that it makes that pace feel even easier and more sustainable. But it's interesting, the way you asked it made me think you have something more specific to say.

Well, I just want to know, well, why am I not running more Marathon Pace, right? And the reason is because Marathon Pace is a physiological no man's land in a sense. And so when you run Marathon Pace, the only reason really to run it is to dial into that race specific effort. But you want to be a little bit faster than that, typically in that threshold range, if you're building some of the more formative physiological responses. And you want to be slower than that, if you're building the foundational physiological responses. Because otherwise, you end up with a situation where you're good at running Marathon Pace, but without the tools to sustain it, really, for 26.2 miles. Because you don't have the foundational aerobic easy running to hold it, and you don't have the threshold work to sustain it for 26.2 miles, as well as hopefully finish faster. So, just to quickly get to that question. And then when you look at the other distances about, well, why are we only focused for six or seven weeks on a very specific phase of work? Well, if we think about it from a half marathon perspective, the strength phase and the race-specific phase are going to look most similar in a half marathon, because typically half marathon pace for most people falls within that threshold range, between aerobic threshold and lactate threshold. And so you'd say, well, okay, so then we're going to be spending 12 weeks working on half marathon pace, right? No. We're going to be spending six, seven weeks working on threshold efforts, which is not specific to pace, which is specific to effort. And then we're going to spend six, seven weeks working on half marathon pace. Those are different things, even if they might be similar or close together. And then if you're thinking about a 10K or 5K, it's like, well, I can't do long 5K intervals for very long before I'm either injured or too sharp to race. So for those shorter distances, I can only really sustain that focused race pace work for a short interval. So anyway, I just wanted to answer that lingering question in people's head. Well, why such a short time? If that might be the perception out there. And that's why. The other thing I would remind people of is that, hey, you got to actually do this in sequence. We have to build those other foundational pieces first before we get too specific with race pace. Because the other thing about this race specific phase is that's when you want to be precise. That's when you want to not go over the edge, but get closer to it. Make decisions about pace and be very intentional about hitting it. Go just to the edge in a workout. Do the extra rep if you're not sure. This is the only phase of work where that applies. And you can only sustain that kind of mentality for so long and as we talked about in previous episodes, that also tees up the brain and the body to think, something big's coming. I'm going to prepare the system. The flight or fight responses kick in so that you're ready to go on the day that you've circled. Okay, so that's phase three. People are wondering, where is that fifth phase? Phase four, another one you're familiar with, the taper phase. The final one to three weeks, typically, depending on the race distance by which you are pulling back on the volume, pulling back slightly on the intensity so that you can rest and recover and consolidate all of your fitness so that you can actually race well when it matters. One thing I remind people on this one is that it takes about ten days to go from workout to assimilating the benefits of that workout in some way into your physiology. So it's not like, did a workout, tomorrow I'm faster. That's not how it works. Do a workout ten days, sometimes even longer, that actually fits into the system and is something you can tap into and use. So there's a time period here at which it's not useful to do intense work once you get that close to the race, because by that point, you can't assimilate it into your fitness in order to use it on race day. But you can screw it up and hurt yourself or get injured, so that you can't race on race day. And so part of the taper science about the duration of a taper is just really around that, the practical timing of how long it takes for work to work.

Yep. And I would say to make it easier to sink in and trust and understand, it's like you also want to be your healthiest and freshest on race day. And we talk so much about cumulative fatigue and how workouts build on one another. And then in this last phase, you're adding that extra rep and pushing to the edge and kind of like getting all you can. So it's like with that, every time we're doing those big hard workouts and we're pushing for that extra rep, you have to think of like risk to reward ratios, right? And so in that window, it's worth the risk because you're pushing so that you can get the most and sort of maximize all that you could within training itself. But we mentioned cumulative fatigue for a reason, that fatigues building, at some point the body is just going to break down. So the taper helps you, quote, cool off. Like when you take the cake out of the oven, you let it cool. When you take the steak off the grill, you need to let it sit. All of that relax, that juice come together. It's like everything in our life points towards it. You got to cool off from all that work and recover. So you brought up the timeline. And so when we come down slowly, we're also signaling to our body like you mentioned in the peak, you're signaling like this is the peak. But the taper is also signaling like hey, you can repair. And I think, I don't know if you wanted to get into like taper madness, but to me this is how I understand why the taper madness even occurs. Because psychologically you've set, not just psychologically, it's your circadian rhythms, everything. You've put yourself in this pattern of two up, one down, two up, one down, two up, one down. And your body's thinking, okay, sweet. I started to recover in that first week and I've got two more weeks of my taper if it's a full marathon. All of a sudden the body's starting to like freak out a little bit, because it's thinking you're going to throw another stressor in. And it's like, nope, I changed the pattern. There's a pattern interruption. And we don't like pattern interruptions. Just on the subconscious level, we don't. And so all of a sudden, it's like, wait, something's different. And even if consciously you're telling yourself, I'm fine, I did my work, I'm tapering, this is where I am, you still feel that like something's off kind of feeling. And that's because your body got used to that pattern. And now you're reteaching it. No, we're coming out and healing. So as it starts to heal, your brain just starts to go crazy because you've interrupted all these patterns.

Yeah, and then physically you feel off because you are in that recovery mode, just like people often feel off in a down week when they're in that recovery mode after an up week. Same is true in the taper. The body's repairing itself. It's going to work. So therefore it feels clunky sometimes and a little bit off and you think, man, marathon pace is hard during this window of time. Well, that's okay. That's just the body preparing itself for the actual day you need it. So typically for marathons, it's three weeks. Typically for half two weeks. Typically for 10K or 5K, a one week taper. Sometimes you can go longer on 10K or half to two weeks. And you just want to do it. And what do you do? You pull back mileage. We like to say one mile per run per week is sort of the rule of thumb that I use. Keep all of your normal running days because we want to keep that routine so we don't throw things off too much. But pull back one mile per run per week, regardless of how you're tapering. Or if you're just doing a one week tapering, it could look like you're down week mileage so that then you're ready to go. You keep your workouts. And oftentimes in this phase of training, workouts are going to include short, very manageable race pace specific intervals. So our marathoners might do two to three times two miles at marathon pace a couple of weeks out during the taper. And our 5k people might do 400s at 5k pace. So you're going to be doing some of that during the taper. You're also going to be doing some sub max shorter, faster intervals to stay connected to that speed without stressing the system too much. Usually again, with plenty of recovery, just like you had in the priming phase. So you might, one workout we like for marathoners is eight, six to eight times 800 at 10k pace with typically two minutes rest. So that you're running at that time, what's a very manageable pace for 800, something you could easily do and control. So we're touching on that speed without overdoing it or putting you in the well. So that's your taper phase. It's critical, it's important. Another comment I'll make here is that it does become individual at this point. Some people respond to shorter tapers, some people respond to better to longer tapers, and people are going to ask, well, how do I know if I'm one or the other? And usually what we say is start with the standards. Start with the three weeks for the marathon, two weeks for the half, one to two weeks for 5k or 10k. See how that goes. Raise some, get experience, and then when you're on your fourth or fifth attempt and you're wanting to see if there's a different way for you that might work, then play with a shorter taper and see how it goes and see what you think and take notes about it and then decide after. All right, now that I have that one experience compared to my other ones, what do I think? Do I want to repeat that or do I want to go back to the other? But that's not something that should be played with when you're early in your journey. That's something you play with once you get more experience. Were we missing anything on Taper?

No, because I kind of snuck in Taper Madness unintentionally, but they were connected in my thought process.

It's an appropriate thing to mention here. We will have an entire episode on Taper. We have a whole chapter on it in the book.

There you go.

So we'll come back to that in much more depth, really into all these phases in much more depth as we go through the book. And the fifth phase, the one that we don't often mention, and that people are probably wondering, what's the fifth phase? We got to the Taper, we're racing, right? And so I think it's appropriate that we emphasize it in the book. There is a fifth phase, which is the recovery phase. You have to, after your race day, after you peak, you have to exhale, you have to come off of that peak, and let the body heal, detrain, and then start to rebuild. And this is something that a lot of people don't love. Some people love it. Some people are like, oh, I'm going to take two weeks off. No big deal. Some people are like, oh, I want to get right back on it. I just had a big result. I want to go keep that linear progression of fitness going. But you can't, and you have to recover. As we like to say, you have to detrain to retrain to a higher place. And this is really about that. And in many ways, it mimics in duration the taper. So marathoners, three week taper, three recovery phase. Half marathoners, two week taper, two week recovery phase. 5K, 10K, one week taper, one week recovery phase. So it kind of puts this perfect mirror image on the race itself, where you're tapering down to the race, and then you're recovering and building back on the other side. What do we do in the recovery phase? We take it easy. We do move. We do run. We like to get some runs in. Initially, maybe walks, but then some runs in. But in a way that's unstructured, in a way that focuses on time, perhaps, and duration, in a way that's super, super easy and mellow, because movement equals blood flow, equals healing, or motion is lotion, as our coach Marilyn likes to say. So that you're doing it, and then so it's without pressure. Maybe you have a written plan, but it's very much in pencil, and you're kind of following the whims of what your body wants in this phase. You're allowing not just the physical recovery, but also the mental recovery from that intensity. You know, anything you were restrictive on or tied on, you're not worried about in this phase. You're loose, you're following your instincts, you're trusting what your body's asking for and giving it, and you're not worried at all about anything other than just feeling good and strong on the other side of this phase of work. But it is so, so critical, and I like the fact that we emphasize it in the book, because you can't then go to the next peak without properly recovering from the last.

And I've just seen it anecdotally so much. When you rush out of this phase, it's going to show up, honestly, like six to eight weeks later, oftentimes. For a small group of people, they feel something in their body right away, and then they back off and they kind of learn quickly and then take the proper recovery. But for many, it's like the slow creep, and so it's like six to eight weeks later, it's like shoot, and the athlete often doesn't connect to those dots. They're like, this is eight weeks after my marathon, I'm fine. I must have done something. They'll try to look for the culprit, and they'll try to find like, what was it this week that I did that caused this? Like, why does my lower back or my sciatica or like, it just, they start trying to figure out like in isolation, what caused it, like as though it was an acute injury. But I'm like, I've actually seen it way too much when people blow past this phase. Like, your big muscles feel really good. Usually, well like, this will vary depending on experience level. But usually within like a week's time frame, most people, you'll get like adrenaline rushes and everything, because you've been training all season, and then you hit that race so hard. And then, so like the energy's there, and your big muscles, you're like, quads are good, glutes are fine, I should go crush something. But it's all the tiny little ligaments and joints. Like it's like the tiniest things that are still inflamed and beat up. And you don't see that, you don't have direct awareness. We don't have proprio reception to like what the ligament in my right ankles do. Like I don't ever feel that until when I do, I know it's bad, you know?

Yeah, and well after the soreness is gone, your body's still repairing itself. And yes, the soreness will be that initial cue in the days immediately after the race where you're walking backwards downstairs, you're moving gingerly, especially for those marathoners. That's where you know, hey, I can't, if I even want to go run, I can't. But then at some point, though that will go away, that'll fade, but then the repair process is still happening. And again, it takes about three full weeks for the marathon, physiologically for you to recover from that, two weeks for the half, a week at least for the 5K and 10K, sometimes longer, I've found, in those shorter distances as well. And so you've got to heed that physical need to pull back, but then there's also that mental need. And as you eluded, often after a race, especially if it went well and you're energized by it, you've got the adrenaline of, I just got a PR, I'm so excited, if I just keep working, I'm going to be able to go straight from here to my next peak and keep building. And yet it just, A, it doesn't work that way physiologically, but two, it also leads to a burnout, a mental burnout, because you can't sustain that kind of focus and intensity for that long. All of us need that mental recovery as well, where you're not following a training plan rigorously, where you're not worried about when you wake up to go get in your long run on a Saturday. And so we need that mental break, but often we don't realize we need it because of that adrenaline and dopamine that's coming off that race and that eagerness to then go get what the next milestone is. And yet we have to heed and listen to both the physical and the mental need to pull back so that we can then come back stronger physically, but then also come back with sustained energy mentally. Because we've both seen it right, where you have that athlete who didn't take that time, they get into it and eight weeks later, they're maybe injured because of not appropriately backing off in the recovery phase, and they're also perhaps burned out or mentally struggling with motivation because it's just impossible to sustain that singular focus beyond a peak. So take your recovery phase. As our coach, Amy, used to say, you got to detrain to retrain. And I saw an interesting graph on this recently. It was talking about it in a different context in terms of peaks and valleys in career, but it showed these two snapshots next to each other. One was this zoomed in snapshot of a downward curve, and then the other one was the zoomed out version of that downward curve being a small little blip in an overall upward trajectory, right, with a much higher peak beyond that. And so we get very zoomed in on this downward curve and not recognize the bigger picture sometimes. And the bigger picture is all about heating the needs of the recovery phase before you start again. And then we got to go back to the beginning. And so one of the things we also emphasize here is that this sequence, these five phases, you can't skip steps. Once you're done with the peak and you go through recovery, you got to start again at speed development. You don't get to skip to strength or skip to race Pacific. That's when people hurt themselves, run into plateaus. You got to detrain and then start over again to build to a higher peak, yes. But also meaning you're going to have to go through some rebuilding of fitness as well. And that's just a part of it. So don't skip steps on the other side. These five periods are in every single macro cycle, whether you like it or not. And if you want to shortcut it, you can, but you won't do it for a long term. There will be issues that pop up along the way. All right. My dog is barking in the background. I don't know if you guys can hear that or not, but I think that means it's time to wrap the episode.

Crouton called it today.

Crouton called it. So there we go. Periodization folks, a couple of reminders before we sign off. One, you want to jump on our Fridays, 2 p.m. Central Time, Instagram Live at Rogue Running. We are live answering your questions about training. So if you have questions about this episode or about your training or how it fits, jump on there with us. We get great questions every week. So even if you don't have a question and you just want to learn, it's a really good time to do it because our listeners and our audience there always bring really good questions. And I think everybody could have a chance to learn if they just jump on with us. Also a reminder, you can check out these episodes on YouTube if you're listening to audio on our Rogue Running YouTube site and of course on any of the audio channels that you might prefer from a podcast perspective. If you want to train with us virtually or in person in Austin or Dallas, check out our website, roguerunning.com. With that, we'll wrap this episode. It's been a pleasure, guys. Go periodize your work and we'll talk to you next week.