Hey, everybody, it is episode 104 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is Chris coming at you without Steve today, but we do have a very, very special guest, head coach of the NAZ Elite team, sponsored by HOKA, Ben Rosario is on with us. How are you doing, Ben?

I'm great, thanks for having me, Chris.

We are super excited to have Ben. As our audience knows, we've talked a lot about you already, Ben, because we're fans of you, the team, and certainly your athletes, Scott, Steph, Ben, and company. So excited to drill in about all of that. We're gonna get to a little bit more background on Ben as we go, but I do wanna start, as we always do, with some running current events. And you recently got firsthand experience watching a couple of big US national championships, so we wanted to break those down with you. Ben, if that's okay.

That'd be great.

Starting with the US Marathon Championships at the California International Marathon on our last podcast, we had two of our runners who raced that event and talked a little bit about their journeys to PR. So now I wanna talk about the front of the race. You obviously had Steph and Ben both racing this one, trying to go for that US Marathon title. And Stephanie in particular was coming back after New York only before we turn around the much discussed already, sort of quick turn from New York. But before we talk about her race and the front of the race, talk a little bit about that decision. Did that come from Stephanie? Was that something you guys talked about together? What was the thought process there?

Well, originally it came from Stephanie. I think it was three days after New York. She came to me with that idea, which of course, originally my first gut reaction was that it was sort of an emotional decision, not a rational decision. But she assured me that wasn't the case, and she laid out her reasoning, much of which had to do with the fact that, you know, her career is not going to last forever. And after 2020, she and Ben have designs on adding to their family. So, you know, when you start thinking about it that way, you have to start looking backwards and saying, okay, well, how many more experiences and opportunities does she really have? And, you know, she's been running very well over 10K and in cross-country and on various road distances these last couple of years. And so there are a ton of opportunities this spring for her to continue that success that she's been having meanwhile. So she still wants to be as prepared as she can for the Olympic Marathon trials in 2020. And the thinking had always been that she wanted to get two more marathons in before the trials. And if we did one in the spring, then that was kind of going to eliminate the possibility of running all those other spring races, 10K, cross-country, half marathons two years. I knew that she would be able to take care of herself and get the treatment she needed and get her body right, because that was really my main concern, was just the injury risk of trying to turn around so fast. But once I thought about it, and once I digested that thinking or that reasoning that she had, then I was totally behind it. I was 100% behind it and really excited about it. And she then trusted me enough to write the schedule. And that was a big piece of that. I trusted her that she'd be able to get her body recovered from New York, but I really needed her to trust me to get her ready because that's kind of a weird and unique, unconventional turnaround. And I knew that I would have her health, her long-term health at the foremost of my thinking when I wrote the schedule. And the athlete isn't maybe always going to think like that. So she did trust me and we just took a very pragmatic approach to those four weeks and it all worked.

Plus for her, there's money on the line at the US Marathon Champs and potentially money associated with the overall road racing circuit podium. So there's other reasons too for her, I would assume that would have had to have factored in.

You'd think that, but I would have to tell you, I don't really think that was the case. She's had a fantastic year financially and between prize money and bonuses and appearance fees, and then also she has her camps and her online coaching and different things. So she's in a very fortunate position, let's just say that. And though she still wants to make money, obviously there's a business side to it. I have to tell you that, I don't think that was part of it.

Well, that's good to hear, especially in a sport where money can be a challenge for the best of us in it. Doesn't it also factor in that she's an experienced marathoner? I've done personally 17 marathons, including CIM in December. And I feel like it seems like my bounce back from every one becomes a little bit easier. I don't know if that's just resilience training over the years of lots of 20 mile runs or just having more marathons in the legs, but the body seems to know how to handle it more given that she's been doing it for a little bit of a while.

I think that's a fair assessment. Yeah, I think that's fair to say. Also, you have to look at the context of each marathon and who the person is and how they recover. And the context of this particular turnaround, you had to look at the fact that New York City for her wasn't very difficult for the first 10 miles or any of the pro women. They had a lot of slow miles in there and they kind of jogged quite a bit of that first 10 miles. So it didn't have the cumulative effect that going hard from the gun would have had for 26.2 straight miles. So that was part of it as well.

So going into this one, spoiler alert, she finished second and ended up coming up about a minute short behind Emma Bates. She did get the PR, but ended up chasing Emma for much of the race who went off the front and stuff sort of settled in with that chase pack for a while. Eventually, I think got pressed a little bit by Samantha Racker, who was third ultimately, but Stephanie took charge, it seemed like, after 35K and ended up getting second by about a minute to the third place. And Samantha, who finished there in third, where were you watching and how did it play out in your mind?

Well, we rented a car and in the car, I had Josh Cox, Josh Cox, excuse me, who's Steph's agent and my good friend, and then Larry Rosenblatt, who also a friend of mine who works with Josh. So we had Josh, Larry, myself, and then we had Noah Drati was in the car too. Josh represents Noah and Noah had his girlfriend, Emma Kurtow, I don't know how to say her last name, but Emma out there, not Emma Bates, a different Emma out there running as well. So that was our car and we drove to the 10K mark and then we saw them again just past halfway. And then we saw Steph again at around, I guess it would have been quickly at about 17 and then again at 21 and then we shot down to the finish. So I saw her pretty many times. Oh, I guess the second part of your question was what did I think? Yeah, so we had a very simple race plan. You know, with the turnaround, look, there was only so much we could do. We really kind of, my theory going into the whole turnaround was let's recover from New York and then let's just maintain as much of the New York fitness as we could possibly maintain. It really wasn't to build fitness. I didn't really expect to be fitter than she was in New York. And so with that in mind and looking at the four workouts she did leading into CIM, I really felt strongly that she could run 540 to 542 pace, you know, the whole way, but I didn't really think we could do a whole lot more than that. Obviously in a perfect scenario, if she still had her legs left, maybe she could pick it up at the end, you know? And so when you talk about her chasing Emma Bates, you know, and choosing to be in the second pack, it really wasn't much of a choice. It was kind of all we could do, you know? So she just went in and executed that plan really, really well. And I think to your point, Samantha, and I think Megan Crifchen, and I think Sarah Crouch all took a turn at trying to pick it up beyond that 540 to 542 rhythm. But each of them, after they tried, fell back, and Steph just stayed really even the whole time. When I saw her at 21, I had been keeping track of Emma Bates' lead, and it was about 90 seconds at that point. And so I thought Steph was close enough to the finish there that, hey, if she was gonna take a swing, she was gonna have to do it then. And that's what I told her when she came by, and she did hear me, and she did pick it up that next mile to about a 535, but she could tell that she wasn't gonna be able to keep that rolling all the way home. So she kind of slipped back to 540s, and then I think her very last mile was 532. So she was strong the whole way, and she did make up 30 seconds on Emma over the last four miles, but to Emma's credit, she was just very fit and had a great day, and there was really nothing Steph could do. I think Steph did everything possible to run the best race she could, given the circumstances.

And that was Emma's debut for those listening, and she finished, I think, with the eighth fastest debut marathon ever by an American woman. So definitely showing promise out of Idaho there. So it'll be interesting to see what Emma does going forward, especially since she turned around, and we'll talk about her result in a second at Club Cross, where she finished eighth just a week later, which is nuts. But going back to Stephanie's race, she PRs by, I think, about 15 seconds, which I know for a lot of people doesn't sound like a lot of the course of 26.2 miles, but that's really huge for somebody who's been chasing a PR since 2011. Recently, I PR'd in the marathon in January by 12 seconds, and I could have been happier about it. So I know that must have been a huge victory for her to get second four weeks after New York, to get the PR that she's been chasing for so long. Was she excited about it?

Oh, I think so. Yeah, I think you could tell that she really was. And, you know, while in some ways I would disagree with the terminology or the verbiage that you used, I wouldn't say she's been chasing her PR. You know, we've been picking races that we thought were right at the time. And some of those races allow for a fast time and some don't. You know, you don't necessarily think you're gonna PR when you choose races like New York City, which she's done twice in the last couple of years. But I will say that, you know, we certainly think she's been in PR shape a couple of different times. And so even though we believed that, and she believed that, you could tell that it was nice to have it validated on paper, you know? And I think, you know, I can't deny that she was very happy, and I was very happy that even though, like I said, we knew she was certainly in better shape than she had been in 2011, a few different times now, it was nice to see it really come to fruition and, you know, be able to update the website and put that she's got a new PR. So, you know, it was very satisfying.

Plus the upside now, to her credit, in her rationale for doing the races, that she can work on the faster end of the spectrum in the spring, which-

That's right.

I suppose if you're looking at the potential fields for 2020 on the women's side with, let's say, Huddle, Hastings, Dez, potentially Flanagan, her own teammate, Kellyn Taylor, you're going to need to be fast, or at least to have the potential to run fast, even if that's a slower, more tactical day on a hilly course in Atlanta. You got to believe you got to work on that end of the spectrum to be able to come back and compete in 2020 for the team. So that's got to be a nice thing as a coach to have that flexibility in the spring.

Yeah, and I don't know that we're even working on that stuff in the spring with an eye on the marathon trials so much as we are just doing it because she's really good at it. You know, and it's a great experience and those are great opportunities. You know, you could make the argument for Steph if you really look at her last two years that she may have a better chance to make the Olympic team in the 10, 000 on the track. She's been very good on the track. She finished third this past summer in Des Moines on the track and, you know, she's run so well at World Cross Country and on the roads at 10K. So I'm certainly not discounting her chances in the marathon, but I think she's got two opportunities. So I think what we're going to be doing in the spring has as much to do with the track trials as it does the marathon. I think what we found with her with the marathon is, you know, for better or worse, she's probably best served in a situation like she had at CIM where we sort of pick what she can do for the entire 26.2 miles. And she's very good at sort of, I guess, parceling out her effort over the course of that entire race and running exactly what she's capable of on the day. So that's, you know, you gotta play the hand you're dealt. And if that's what she's good at in the marathon, if that's the best way for her to run a marathon, that's probably the situation we'll try to set up for her at the trials where we figure out what she can do and we go out there and do that.

And of course she finished first, her first national title at Peachtree in the 10K Road Race. So I think you're right. She's got a definite shot to make that team, especially depending on what Huddle decides to do with the 10K, I would assume she's also gonna be trying to make that team as well, but we'll see.

Well, I think it depends. I just say, I think it depends on, I mean, a person like Molly, I think it depends on if she makes the marathon team. So that 10, 000 team is gonna be very dependent on who makes the marathon team. I think whoever doesn't will come back and try to make it in the 10K, but I think whoever does make it will probably keep their focus on the marathon. So that team in the 10 is very much undecided because we don't know who's gonna be standing on the line. So yeah, I don't know. I think it's cool that there's just so many good female distance runners in America right now. We're kind of at the apex of all time anyway of American distance running on the female side, which is cool.

It is. It's gonna be fun to watch. Switching to the men for a second. They had a similar race in a sense that you had somebody go off the front, your former athlete, Matt Yano, took it out, I wouldn't say that fast, but at a faster clip than the field wanted to go and built a pretty good lead just like Emma did. I think he was also up about 90 seconds at one point before things started getting hard for him and the group kind of came back on him, particularly with Brogan Austin from 10-Man Elite out of Boulder, charging past him in the final half mile. Ben was also in that field. Ben Bruce, Stephanie's husband. So I assume you were following both fields, but what'd you see on the men's side?

Yeah, well, I mean, Ben, I'll just address really quick. I mean, he had had a pretty, let's see, undesirable buildup with a couple of different things that set him back, particularly something that set him back the last three or four weeks. He had banged his knee pretty good, playing with his boys actually, fell off his bike and it really hampered what he could do in the last three weeks. So I kind of knew right away that, or I kind of knew going in that either it was gonna sort of be a miracle and he was gonna be okay, or more than likely that lack of training over the last few weeks was gonna catch up to him at some point. So, you know, he gave it a go and he's a veteran and it was kind of a why not situation. But once I saw his split starting to slow, even just around halfway or just after, I kind of knew he was gonna be in for a long day. So that was Ben's race, but he'll come back and have a good marathon here in 2019. But as far as the front of the race and watching it, you know, I was more focused on stuff, but I was seeing what was going on. And yeah, I mean, I wasn't surprised that Matt went to the front. I knew he had been pretty fit and I know that's what he likes to do. So that wasn't a huge surprise. I thought early on that that pack behind him had a really good chance to eventually get him just because there was so, it's nothing against Matt, it's just that there were so many of them. And you know, running in that critical mask gives you a huge advantage. It's just that much less energy that you have to expend yourself. You're kind of feeding off everyone else's energy as well. So it's a big advantage. But then when it got late, I thought, oh, there's just too much of a gap. They're not gonna be able to get them. And then I was proven wrong because Brogan had just a phenomenal last 5 to 7K. It was really very impressive. And you know, that's super cool. I was excited to see someone close like that.

He destroyed that last mile. It was cool to see his finishing video because he was clearly swept up in the adrenaline of seeing that body in front of him and then going to get it, which is really, really cool, especially for a guy who really before the race was largely an unknown, at least, you know, in the bigger running news of the world, but no longer certainly unknown. So let's switch gears to Club Cross real quick. Spent a little less time on that, but I did want to talk about it because this is, in my opinion, one of the coolest meets of the year. It's not to be confused with the US. Cross Country Championships, which are in February. This is really the team championship, and certainly they're individual accolades, but all the big clubs typically bring teams. Brooks Hanson, who you train with back in the day, always shows up here with teams trying to get that team win. And it's just a fun, all-commerce cross-country meet. We love cross-country because you get marathoners competing against milers and steeplers, and basically everybody gets thrown together on a potentially crazy course in what might be cold weather, sometimes hot, could be muddy, could be icy. And it's just fun to watch. And in this case, it was certainly no different. I actually have a, I'm not an elite runner. I'm a 35-minute, 10K guy, so I might show up in an age group result here and there, but I'm certainly not competing with the best of the best, but I didn't play, or I didn't run cross-country track in high school. I played soccer. I got into running later in life, and I decided one year, a team of us here from Austin went to Club Cross, and in 2014, to Lehigh University in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, and competed in this meet and with a bunch of other sort of age groupers. And we ended up in a box next to the Bowman Track Club with Ryan Hill and Matt T in camp standing next to us. And it's just a cool event, because you see that really all levels of runners competing at a course that can sometimes be crazy and challenging and fun. And certainly this one was no exception. You had two athletes, Aaron Clark and Danielle Shanahan, relatively new to the team, finished 12th and 16th on the women's side. Emma Bates came back from her marathon championship, finished eighth on the women's side, which is absolutely unbelievable. You had Kate Mackey from Brooks Beast win it on the overall for the women on the men's side, Ben Blankenship, a 1500 miler showed up and got the win against Hilary Boris Steepler and Ryan Malhulski from Brooks Hanson's was third on the men's side. So just a cool, fun event. How was your experience there? How'd you feel about your athletes' results? What'd you think of the races overall?

Oh, I'm with you.

I love clubs.

It's a blast, for all the reasons you mentioned. I ran it back in the day a few times and really always enjoyed it. You said everything I would have said about the event, so I'll take you to my thoughts on Aaron and Danny. They did okay. They did okay. You know, we're not big on excuses. Aaron was a little sick going in, so that was kind of a bummer. And I think Danny made a couple mistakes during the race that cost her some places. But you know, like you said, they're young and they're fairly new to the team. And so, you know, it's all part of the learning process. And sometimes we get spoiled because we've had so many good results this year and you want more and more and more and more and more. But you know, in my position, I have to step back and realize, hey, in the greater scheme of things, they had a good fall. They got some good training in. They got used to Flagstaff. They got used to the program. And you know, it was always about setting us up for 2019. So I think they're going to be just fine. And what was your last question?

Oh, just about the events in general. It's awesome to see Ben show up and win a 10K cross country. As a miler, he was also kind of cagey in his post-race interview. I don't know if you saw it, where he was talking about potentially moving up straight to the 10K, which you never know. You never know from Ben, but that was an interesting result for him.

Yes, so watching the race was cool because it was, you were kind of, the men's race I'm talking about, obviously the women's race I'm watching with my eyes completely focused on Aaron and Danny, but watching the men's race, since I didn't have anybody in there, Ben Bruce and I were running around the course kind of playing the game. Hey, who do you think looks best? Who's gonna win this thing? And I wouldn't have picked Ben early on, not because he didn't look good, just because I was thinking more that it would be one of the classic 10K type guys, strength type guys. But then as it whittled down, and as it got to about a pack of four or five, that's when I started thinking, man, Blanket Ship looks really good. He just looks very in control. And Heath, Garrett Heath, who kind of was my pick to win, he was just showing little signs of fatigue. You know, he would just, they would go up a little pop-up hill and he'd lose a step or two, and then he'd have to scramble to get it back, or they'd go around a turn and Blanket Ship and Boar would come out first, and Garrett would come out after that. And so, you know, it just started to look like Heath was on the ropes. And so then it was kind of, you were kind of thinking, okay, it's gonna be Blanket Ship or Boar. And you know, I think once Ben could smell the finish, he's just so tough to beat down the home stretch of any race. So yeah, he got it. And it's always been cool thing. It's always been a cool thing to me how milers can run cross country. It's so weird. I don't know, you know, whether it's Nick Willis in college or, I mean, there's all kinds of, Nick Willis and Nate Brandon both ran well in cross country in college. Senna Calasitor from Arkansas way back in the day. Even Leo Manzano had a decent finish in cross country at NCAAs in college. Just for some reason, I don't know, it's just their toughness. They can get it done. And so, yeah, that was fun. It was fun to watch him come down the stretch and win it. He's been to Flagstaff a number of times and he's always been nothing but nice when I've come across him. So I'm a fan.

Apparently he's 29 years old too. I don't know if you saw that in the results. There's the-

Yeah, I don't know. I don't know how old he is. 29 sounds good.

There's a great mythology about his age, which is kind of funny. Our sport needs people like Ben, who are willing to inject a little bit of personality into it, so it's awesome to see that. Now, switching gears to a bigger sport question. This week I noticed that ESPN named Eliud Kipchoge on its list of top 20 most dominant athletes of 2018. I don't know if you saw this. He was picked number two behind Simone Biles, the gymnast. And I was listening to some talking sports heads who were bemoaning the fact that LeBron James was the first mainstream sport athlete on that list. If you're using mainstream to talk about football, basketball, baseball, those kinds of things. He was 13th, well behind Kipchoge and Biles and other athletes from golf, tennis, et cetera. Are you a Kipchoge fan?

Yeah, I mean, I was in Berlin. I watched him set the world record. He's a rock star in our sports. It's fun to watch him run. If people are disappointed that LeBron was 13th, I don't know what to tell you. I mean, he's the best player in a sport that's only played in a small percentage of the world. And it's a very, very competitive sport where I think you could make the argument that there are people fairly close to him. Whereas Eliud Kipchoge is the number one athlete by far in a sport that's participated in across the entire world. And he's minutes, minutes ahead of his next closest competitor. So it's, I don't know, it would be hard to make the argument to me that Kipchoge isn't more dominant in his sport than LeBron is in his. And that's coming from a huge LeBron fan.

When you see Kipchoge post his training schedules, he's done it a couple of times now after races. Are you the nerd that dives in and tries to figure out what's he doing? Or is it something like, hey, everybody's different, I'm not gonna dig in too much about another athlete's program?

Well, I've looked at it for sure. You know, you'd be doing yourself a disservice as a coach if you're not checking out what people are doing, especially when those people are having a lot of success. So whether it's checking out the Kenyon training programs or the Japanese training programs, I'm certainly doing that. I don't then copy and paste it into our schedules. I critically analyze it and I think about the context of who Eliud Kipchoge is and what his talent level is and why he's able to do some of the things that he's able to do, you know? But no, I think it's a smart thing to do to check out his training logs. And I can't think of anything that we've exactly taken verbatim from what he's done, but I do like certainly the idea or the general principles that he follows. And I'd say that we have many of those same principles in our program.

Plus he's been doing it in the same system since he was in middle school, essentially, right? Hasn't always trained for the marathon, but I think that's one thing that people neglect to think about is the fact that he's basically been working for 20 years with the same coach in a similar system, building volume, building consistency. And if there's a thing that matters in the marathon, that would be certainly one of the most important, right?

Yeah, I think in any sport and in any, especially in any endurance sport, you have to have that good coach athlete relationship and the coach has to be able to sort of figure out what makes an athlete tick, mentally, physically, et cetera. And there's no doubt that he has that. He and his team have shown time and time again that they know how to be ready on the biggest days. And in every sport, that's the name of the game.

So I wanna switch gears, but still talk sort of running events. I wanna go back to the 2004 Olympic trials. You were a Missouri born athlete, ran in high school, went to Truman State University of DS to school in Missouri, ultimately ended up after going to Colorado, you ended up applying essentially to Brooks Hanson's. Joined them, I believe it was in 2003, shortly after they got their Brooks sponsorship, if I'm noting my history correctly, ultimately qualified for the Olympic trials, ended up in the 2004 Olympic trials. That team was ultimately Alan, Culpepper, Meb, and Dan Brown, Meb famously went on to win the silver in Athens. But that 2004 Olympic trials was one of the first events as a soccer player, got into running later in life, really didn't start running until 2000, 2001, became really aware of the top of the sport about 2003, 2004. But I remember paying attention to my first marathon trials in 2004. And of course, that one was noted by Brian Sell, your teammate at the time from Brooks Hanson's going off the front, staying away for a long time. I think he got caught somewhere in the 21st mile, maybe 22nd mile, ultimately faded to 13th that day. But in a lot of ways, his result and then Trent Brenney's result, who was fourth that day, I believe you guys roomed together in Rochester Hills, was one of the events that really put Brooks Hanson's on the map well before we certainly knew the name Desiree Davila or Des Linden. So talk about that race. How was it for you and how was it for the team to have such fireworks going off with Brooks Hanson's jerseys in various places?

Oh, this is cool. I don't get asked about this very much. Okay, so yes, it was such a fun time to be on the team because we were all young and I think everybody was in their 20s except a couple of vets that we had hanging around from kind of the local scene. And we were just so blue collar and we just worked really, really hard in the thick of a Michigan winter to get ready for that race. Brian Sell was just kind of establishing himself as a star. I mean, we clearly knew it because we saw him train every day. We knew how fit he was. Clint Baron was very, very good. That was sort of the apex of his career as well. He was a little bit older than Brian, but they were good buddies and good training partners. We sort of had two training groups for that race. It was Clint and Brian and then a guy named Nick Cordes, who was a D2 guy also, but who was super talented. Unfortunately, his career kind of got cut short due to injuries and he didn't even get to compete in that race. But going into it during the training cycle, he was training with Brian and Clint and they were crushing it in training. And then you had a second tier of guys with myself and Terry Shea and Mike Franco and Bobby Busquart and Trent Briney, who were all sort of training more for, you know, kind of like 218, whereas Brian and Clint and Nick were training more for 212. Well, what happened during the training cycle was that Trent was hitting everything that our group was doing with relative ease compared to the rest of us. And our group went down to Houston to train in the warm weather for about a week, culminating with the Houston Half Marathon, where we were supposed to just run our marathon pace as a workout. Whereas Brian and Clint and Nick went down to Orlando and trained there for a week and did their half marathon tune up at marathon pace at the Disney World Half Marathon. So what happened in Houston was Trent went out and he got a little carried away during the race and ended up running, I think 105 or 106 low instead of 108 like we were supposed to or 109. But the thing was he was easy. I mean, he was easy doing that. And so after that race, he went to Keith and Kevin and kind of asked if he could jump in with Brian and Clint the last three weeks of the segment. And they agreed because he had looked so good. So it was only those last three weeks that he actually trained with Brian and Clint. And in the race itself, I mean, look, when the race started, I fully believed that Brian was gonna make the team. 100% I believed that. I just knew what he had been doing and he was just incredibly fit. The story that maybe you don't know and maybe a lot of people don't know is going into the race for the last three, four, five weeks, the plan was, hey, Brian and Clint are gonna go run, and Nick, until he got hurt, Brian and Clint are gonna go run five minute pace no matter what. That's what we're gonna do. That's the game plan, right? Cause they felt like they could run two 11, two 12 on that course. Keith and Kevin felt like they could. But then when we got to Birmingham and we got downtown, cause we had been staying outside of downtown for a couple of weeks leading into the race, when we actually got into the host hotel and looked at the weather forecast, it was a little windier than we thought it was going to be. And so Kevin, at our last team meeting where we discussed the plan for the very final time, tried to sort of change the plan. And what he said to Brian and Clint was, hey, let's not do anything until 16 miles and then let's make it a 10 mile race. And just, if you can run under 50 minutes for the last 10 miles, I think you'll make the team. And I think that sort of just went in one ear and out the other with Brian because he had been so hell bent on running five minute pace, no matter what, from the gun, that he just wasn't going to change his plan. So when the race went off, it was only about three or four miles in and he just couldn't take it anymore and he started running five minutes and nobody wanted to go with him. And so he built this huge lead, just running five minute pace, which to be honest with you, I think he could have done the whole way, no problem. But what happened was the race started about nine miles out from downtown and then once you got downtown, then you did these five mile loops. Well, there wasn't a soul on the course for the first nine miles. I mean, it was just strip malls, McDonald's, Burger King, classic American big boulevard kind of thing. And then when they got downtown, or when Brian got downtown, he's got this minute lead in the Olympic trials. He's got 10 miles to go, I guess a little more than 10 miles to go. We probably got downtown, yeah, when I say nine miles in. So I guess he's got more like 16 miles to go and he's got this big lead and now there's a crowd. Now he hears all these people and he's 25 years old and he gets antsy and he starts running 450s. And that's what really crushed him. It wasn't taking the lead, it wasn't building a big lead, it was he got downtown and started running 450s, which that was over his head. And he built the lead even bigger for a while, but then he started coming back and then it hit hard. And like you say, at 21, he got past. Now I know I'm going long, but so I'm out there and I'm running and I never have any desires or dreams of being in the top 10 in this race. I know who I am at that point and I just wanna run as best as I can. And I was, to tell you the truth, more interested in what Brian was doing and Clint than I was myself. So I'm running on the course and my friends had come down, driven down, my college teammates and a couple other buddies. And I hear them cheering for me. Now this is late into the race. The leaders are well past 20 miles. And I hear them say to me, cause they know I wanna know what's going on, hey, Sell fell back, but Trent's in fourth. And they're talking about Trent Briney, my roommate. And I'm thinking, I don't have a lot of time to process it, cause I'm running, but I'm thinking to myself, surely they meant Clint. Surely they didn't mean Trent. And so I finished the race and sure enough, Trent had gotten fourth and Clint had been fifth. And Trent had basically done exactly what Keith and Kevin said. He just stayed in the pack through 16 and the pack started rolling. Culpepper and Meb and Dan got that whole thing moving. And Trent just didn't really pay attention to his watch. He just raced and they basically ran 107, 105 for their splits. And he ended up with a 212 whatever and only missed the Olympic team by about 30 seconds. So I still use that story with our athletes, A, to remind them that it's not all about how crazy the workouts were leading in. It's about mastering, being efficient, hitting the workouts with as much relative ease as possible. And then, when it comes down to racing, especially in a tactical race like that, sometimes it's just about belief and turning the watch off and turning the mind off and just competing like you do when you're in sixth grade, running the mile in gym class. And I think that's what Trent did.

And I remember, because Dan Brown went on to make the team in the 10K as well. Culpepper may have as well, I don't know. Ultimately, I remember waiting, because I became a fan of Brooks Hanson's watching all that play out. And I remember hoping that somehow Trent would get that alternate call up if Brown dropped out and decided not to double at the Olympics, which he ultimately did. He went and did both in Athens. But were you guys waiting on Bait and Breath that maybe he might get that shot?

Yeah, I think Keith and Kevin really thought that he would. They really thought that either Mev or any of the three really would make the team in the 10K and then decline the marathon spot and take the 10K spot. You know, in all honesty, I kind of didn't agree. I mean, I didn't say anything, because I was hopeful, but I just kind of felt like, why would you run the marathon trials if you didn't want to run the marathon? Why would you put yourself through that if you didn't want to run the marathon at the Olympics, one of the sexiest events in the Olympic games, in the history of the Olympic games? And so I wasn't quite as sure that that was going to happen. And you know, when Dan made the team in the 10, it wasn't too much after that before Alberto and he kind of announced that they were going to double, which was a bummer because, you know, that seemed a little bit selfish at the time. Obviously he pulled it off with Galen later on, you know, I suppose. But Dan didn't run particularly well in Athens there. But anyway, that was a bummer for Trent. But you know what? When you earn your spot in your top three, you can do whatever you want with it. So I don't have any ill will toward Dan for taking both spots, he earned them.

And ultimately, Brian Sell went on to make the team in 2008. That's right. So it all worked out. He was the first Olympian, I think, for Brooks Hanson's, right?

That's correct.

Cool. Well, that must make you, for your efforts as a spectator from inside the race, you finished 37th that day. But that's a hell of a story to tell. I love it.

Thanks for letting me tell it.

So as I think about, now I'm taking that to the future, as I think about the 2020 trials, obviously we already kind of referenced the women's race. A lot of women who can make this team, including Kellyn and Stephanie. On the men's side though, it seems a little bit more wide open, sort of like maybe it was in 2004, 2008 for the men, where that second and third spots, assuming Galen is healthy, are wide open, right? And so as you think about that for Scott Smith, Scott Fauble and your team, what's the thought process? I mean, how are you preparing to make that team in 2020?

Well, I think we're just preparing in the same way that we've been preparing for the last several years since we started the program. We're just trying to get better. Each athlete, we're trying to get, trying to put each athlete in a position to succeed. We're trying to continue to build aerobic capacity and strength over the course of time. We're continuing to implement workouts that we think will best prepare them for the marathon and particularly for racing the marathon late. You know, if you saw how Scott Fauble closed in New York, that's the type of last 10K I think you're gonna have to have over a similar type of course, to be honest, or a similar type of terrain, that last 10K, that's what you're gonna have to do to make the team. You're gonna have to run five flats or better on hilly terrain for the last 10K if you wanna make the team on the men's side. So I don't think there's anything magical about what we're gonna do. We're gonna keep doing what we've been doing. On the women's side, you know, Kellyn is gonna be in a really good position because the race is gonna suit her. I think the ups and downs are gonna suit people who are very, very strong, physically strong. And she's physically strong. She has very strong muscles, tendons and ligaments. And she's gonna be less likely to break down than some of her competitors, I believe. So she already has a natural advantage, which we'll continue to try to take advantage of by working in the weight room and putting a lot of miles on her legs, et cetera. I think Steph, like I mentioned earlier, she's gonna be as fit as she can be or we're gonna run her race. And, you know, I think similar to Dez, in some ways, Dez Lyndon, you know, we're gonna run the fastest we can run on the day. And if people, if three or more people beat us, then we'll tip our cap. The big wild card for us on the women's side is Alaphine Tellyamuk, who is phenomenal, obviously at the half marathon and 15K, 25K, that sort of range. She has nine national titles to her name, but has yet to really master the marathon, but she's only 29. And she hasn't done a marathon in our program yet. And I think when she does, we're gonna take a giant step forward into putting her in a position to potentially make that team. So I think we're in a great spot with Scott Smith and the other men as well. I think it's gonna be an advantage on both sides for us to have multiple people in the lead pack or at least fighting for spots. That just creates a synergy and an energy that other teams aren't going to have.

Yeah, for sure. A la Amy Hastings and Shalane, certainly in the last trials that were able to kind of work together and help each other.

Correct.

In that race. So you talked a little bit about your training philosophy there. Obviously you emphasize building that aerobic foundation with an aerobic strength sort of emphasis year round. I've also seen you say in other interviews that you guys otherwise kind of do all the other systems all the time. So what does that look like in maybe in the context of like a five month build to a marathon? You know, how does that play out? Obviously you're working all systems. What does that look like? When does the marathon specific work start? How do you puzzle together a peak marathon block?

Well, certainly it depends on the context of what you just finished up. Sometimes you don't have the luxury of a really long block like you just described, nor do I think I'd want a five month, maybe four months at most, 20 weeks at most. If we had 20 weeks, what I would do is build very gradually, very slowly, both in terms of mileage and intensity. Early on in the segment, there would be a little more, a bit more of the shorter work, 400s and 800s and things like that. And the longer workouts would be a little more medium, a little easier. And then as it went further into the segment, that that would flip. And anytime we'd be doing something a little speedier, it would be relatively easier. And the longer stuff would become much more specific to the marathon and much more difficult. So it's just, it's what you're emphasizing during those different periods. You're always working on everything, but you're emphasizing certain things more than others. And basically it just comes, it's just as simple as emphasizing the specific workouts that are closer to what you'll be dealing with on race day. You emphasize those more. So, you know, it's the same for a 10K. If we're training for the 10K, it's not that we're not doing long workouts. It's not that we're doing short, it's not that we're not doing short, fast workouts, but as we get close to the race, the emphasis will be on the workouts that are more that 10K pace type work. Those will be the harder sessions closer to an event like that, if that makes sense.

Yeah, and I assume you guys are doing a little bit of running economy work or turnover work throughout. Is that fair to say?

Yeah, correct. I mean, even in the marathon segment, even in the thick of it, let's say a four week block that starts out about six weeks from the marathon, those would probably be our biggest four weeks. And even then, once a week or once every couple of weeks, we're doing a little leg speed session where we warm up for four miles, we go to the track, we run 10 times, 20 seconds fast with a minute easy in between, and then we cool down from four miles. So it sounds like not a lot, and it's not a lot, but it's enough to wake up the legs, engage the fast switch muscle fibers, remind the body what it feels like to feel fast and smooth and be up on our mid foot and running with complete and utter efficiency because you don't want to become that marathoner that you see that is just shuffling along, has no power, has no pop in their stride, has no length in their stride. You need those things. The more powerful your stride, the more efficient your stride, then the less energy you're using with each stride, and quite frankly, the faster you can go.

Plus the way we see some of these races close these days, you gotta be able to turn it on sometimes at the end.

Yeah, I mean, I think that's part of it. Although, gosh, you would hope that it's not closing anything in anything faster than you can physically run. It's really more about how strong are you, how efficient is your form at the end so that you can run what you're capable of at the end. Everybody was so impressed with Shalane's final 10K when she won the New York City Marathon in 2017, which so was I, obviously. But the coach in me, what I saw there was I saw someone who was prepared to be running at her most efficient late. That's what allowed her to run so fast. The actual splits that she ran, she's run those splits a gazillion times. The impressive thing was that she was able to run them that late into the race. And I think that was a product of strength training. And obviously, I don't know exactly what she did, but her and Jerry working on being able to run those kind of splits late into workouts.

And that's where the long runs come in sometimes, right? Structured long runs with pace work. You guys are famous for those, and you share those openly on Final Surge. So talk about some examples there of what you guys do late in a cycle that's marathon specific in inside long runs.

Well, a lot of this stuff is really fresh in my head because Scott Fauble and I have just finished up editing our book called Inside a Marathon that essentially takes the reader all the way through the 20 weeks, the four months that led up to New York City for him. And he sort of tells his part and then I tell my part. And so in that editing process, I've reread this thing a million times and I'm really locked in right now to what was going on in his brain and in his body these last few weeks leading into New York City. And to answer your question, a couple of the real big sessions late weren't necessarily particularly sexy on paper, but I think they were the sessions that really allowed him to close well in New York. For example, three weeks out from the race, we ran 26 miles, he and Scott Smith, and the first 20 were on a hilly, rolling dirt road and the instructions were to just run an easy 20 mile, or nothing super fancy. But then when they came back, so they went out and back, and when we got back to the car as we were at, and we had parked at a loop that we have that's a little over a mile around, and it's kind of gradual up, gradual down, and they ran four miles at marathon effort around that loop, already having 20 miles of hilly running on their legs, and they didn't feel particularly great, and they kind of had to grind through it. I think Scott Fauble averaged 514s, and Scott Smith averaged 521s. This is at 7, 300 feet, mind you, and they finished the workout and cooled down two miles to get 26 on the day. And it was nothing that would pop out on paper necessarily, I guess, other than the length of the run, certainly didn't compare from a storytelling perspective to some of the other sessions he had had leading up to that one. But if you really think about it, what was more specific to what he had to do in New York than that? In New York, at the end, you're grinding, you have to grind up Fifth Avenue, it's a big, almost mile long uphill, then you get into Central Park, and you're down, and then you're up, and then you're turning, and then you're on to 59th, and then you turn into the park on Columbus Circle, and then you turn again, and then you have uphill to the finish. It's just difficult. And it's on really tired legs. And so doing a workout like that, I thought was just as important as anything else we had done all segment long.

Talk about what you learned from doing that book. And by the way, when's it going to be available for us? I was looking, I know the pre-orders have closed, but when do you think it'll be out for those to buy?

Well, great question, you know, gratuitous plug here. It's getting printed. The printing begins tomorrow, and the shipping will commence as soon as that printing is done within just a few days. It's hard for me to give, we had promised December 15th, and so I think it'll be very close to that. Certainly people will get them before Christmas who pre-ordered them, but as soon as the printing is done, to answer your question, we'll reopen the ordering, and that should be any day now. Cool.

Check that out at nazelite.com, everybody. So what did you learn as a coach through that? I know as a coach myself, we all have our perspectives on how things are going, but what did you learn seeing his side of things?

There were a couple of times where he felt kind of crappy that I thought he looked really good and didn't realize he felt crappy, but for the most part, we were very much on the same page. I mean, I could tell when he was kind of grinding out there, and I could also tell when he felt like a million bucks. If anything, what I learned more than maybe perhaps I had known before is I really think I just have now a good idea of who I work best with, and look, here's the thing. You're not gonna mesh with everybody perfectly, but when you have a group of only about a dozen people, during the recruiting process and the vetting process, in terms of finding new athletes, when you have roster spots open up, you have to get people that are gonna check all the boxes or as many boxes as you can possibly check. And the box that absolutely has to be checked is they're gonna have to mesh with the coach. You know, they just are. And that's the same thing on a college team. That's the same thing on a pro basketball team. You know, as great as Greg Popovich is, not every single player meshes with him, you know? And the thing about Forbes and I is that we mesh, you know? And he trusts me and I trust him. And I think I spoke about that earlier in this podcast with Steph Bruce as well. You know, and when the belief is super strong between athlete and coach, that's when good things happen. You know, of course, I think we train really well. Of course, I believe in what we do. But the fact is, I believe in him, you know? And he believes in me in return, and that's why it worked. That's really why it worked. And so that's what I'm trying to cultivate with every athlete moving forward is just that same belief because, you know, I do feel like for my many flaws, if I believe in you, I believe in you in such a way that you'll then believe in yourself, maybe more than you knew you could. And so that's what I learned from the book, that this is a relationship that works really well. And I think that's the key to the success we've had together.

Speaking of that, I saw you mentioned somewhere also in an interview where you talked about having a natural confidence of sort of being the guy who wants to be in charge, because that gives you the responsibility and pressure to be your best. But you've had that, as long as you can remember, it seemed like, are you looking for that in athletes too? That same natural confidence? And do you think that's a born trait or is it something we learn?

Well, I don't think it's a born trait. I would have said that until I saw a sports psychologist talk about it and remind me that we're born crying, pooping, peeing and needing to be taken care of 24 hours a day. So he says that somewhere along the way, we learn toughness and we learn that ability to lead and that ability to have self-confidence. So I don't know where mine came from, but yeah, for whatever reason, I've had it as long as I can remember. And I should point out that we're all different. Yes, I happen to feel that I operate best when I'm in charge, but conversely, I don't operate very well when I'm not. So I tend to get lazy and I don't feel as motivated if I'm not in charge. So I've got plenty of flaws, but I guess to answer your question about the athletes, I do think I work best with confident athletes. You know, I really do. And I think that athletes who are confident are actually more likely to give themselves over to a system. And I know that sounds counterintuitive. You would think, oh, well, the self-confident athlete believes in himself or herself so much that they believe they know what is right. And that sounds good on the surface, but if you really dig into that, in my experience anyway, the most confident athletes are the ones that just say, hey, tell me what to do and I'll do it. Because basically they believe in themselves so much and their ability to get it done on race day, that for them, training is just a means to an end. Training is just part of the process that they have to go through to get to the day that they really enjoy, which is race day. And so that's the athletes that I like, the ones that just say, hey, coach, tell me what to do and put me on the line ready to go. I'll take care of it from there.

Yeah, plus I think once they find that belief and in a program, a system, a coach, then they project that confidence onto that too. So it kind of gets pulled in to their self-confidence.

A hundred percent. Snowballs in the right direction. Totally.

Let's segue that. It's just sort of talking about the mental side of the game, especially with the marathon. I got to see you with Stephanie in New York at a Hoka event on Friday night, a couple of days before the marathon. And she talked about her, or I asked about, and then she answered, talking about her mental prep before a marathon. And she talked a lot about the movie's Rocky, which I thought was awesome. She had very specific Rocky clips playing through her mind to sort of build confidence in various ways. But how do you help athletes work on that side of the game, especially at the marathon, where you've got a long time to be in your head?

Well, you know, I think it's a process over time, just little tidbits here and there, just, you know, talking in a car ride down to Camp Verde or a car ride to a plane ride on the way to a race or just jogging next to them on a warm up or whatever, just little tidbits here and there about what I kind of think works. But I would also say kind of to the conversation we were just having, it just, if you're confident and you lose confidence and the majority of the group is the same way, then sort of through osmosis, that confidence tends to rub off on everyone and you just sort of know no other way. And the bar is where it is and it's very high and this is what we do. And every time that somebody goes out and gets it done, it just increases that confidence in every single athlete on the team, not just the athlete who performed on that day. And so I think confidence on race day is much like training and accumulation of things over time.

Well, I shared a quote with our group in Sacramento that is a Bobby Julie quote. He said, you can't do epic shit with basic people. That's good. When you surround yourself with people that aren't basic people that are doing big things together, then it tends to rub off on you. So it's a little bit what you're saying there too, right?

I agree. I think that so much of the success I've had in my adult life is directly attributable to those I've surrounded myself with, be it my wife who's been with me every step of the way or my former business partner in St. Louis, Matt Helbig, who was just an unbelievably bright and driven guy, to the athletes that I work with now. It really is true that saying that you're only as good as those you surround yourself with.

So one more thing on training. You talked about the strength and conditioning program. You guys do. I think that's a huge part of being a good marathoner, is being able to keep your legs late in the race and doing some power work particularly is important for that from a street training standpoint. Something we emphasize with our athletes here. Talk a little bit about that. Generally how you guys approach it and maybe some of the specific pieces. How many sessions are you doing? What do they kind of look like at a high level?

Yes, so this isn't a strength of mine. I don't know the strength and conditioning world. I choose to stay in my lane and do what I'm good at. So we have strength and conditioning coaches that work with our athletes twice a week. So we go into the weight room supervised twice a week. Once on Monday, once on Thursday for an hour each time. And each athlete has their own personal program put together by those coaches based on the athletes' biomechanical needs and based on what race they're getting ready for, what type of race. Is it a shorter race? Is it a longer race? Does the race involve a lot of hilly terrain? Does it involve a lot of turns? Does it involve a lot of downhill like Boston? It's all individualized and it's periodized. They use periodization to get their athlete to the point that they want them to be before the big race, just like I do in training. So it very much mimics how we train running wise. It's a very calculated approach. And again, it's very individualized. So that's kind of in a nutshell what we're doing in the weight room.

But you believe in it clearly, right? I mean, I know you talked about it. With Brooks Hanson's, you guys weren't necessarily doing a lot of that because it maybe wasn't as in vogue, so to speak, then. But now it seems like it's kind of brass tacks. If you want to compete at a high level at the marathon, you need to be doing something like that.

Yeah, I mean, look, I'm just an anecdotal evidence kind of guy. And so all I can tell you is that it's working for us big time, really in a super tangible way. And since you mentioned Steph Bruce, I'll just tell you that I don't think there's a better example on our team than Steph Bruce. She's not a big person. She's not as naturally strong as Kellyn Taylor, right? So the fact that over the last two years, since she's had her babies, she's been able to close faster than ever before, even though she's in her mid-30s now, and she's been able to race faster than ever before at shorter distances. Is the training a part of that? Sure, I'd love to believe that, and I think that it is. But the weight room is really where she's made huge gains because she's been able to... Because I think a lot of people think of the weight room as a place for runners to prevent injury, and that is part of it, but I think it's a great place to enhance performance. She's more powerful than she's ever been, and she's able to late in the race, be as strong and efficient as she was in the beginning of the race, and then she's able to, with each and every stride as she's kicking, produce more power than ever before. So I know that's attributable to the weight room and to the things that AJ and Wes Gregg, our coaches, have done with her in there.

So a couple more questions, then we'll let you go, because I know you're busy and have a family and a team to run. Not that you're running your family, but...

I'm definitely not.

Translating all this...

My wife runs the family.

Translating all of this to the everyday athlete. I talked a little bit about the group we brought to California International Marathon. We had 215 athletes registered from a guy who ran a 224 to a couple Olympic trials qualifier ladies who got it done on that day, to people that ran close to six hours in their first marathon. And so we have a huge range of athletes, a lot of them doing very similar training in a sense, different paces perhaps, but the work ultimately at the end of the day doesn't look that different. I described when we were meeting quickly in the lobby there, a workout where we did a simulator workout. It was a downhill point to point course where we finished on a track with some mile repeats at the end to try to simulate staying fast at the end of the race on tired legs. Talk about that translation. How much do you think elite principles apply to the everyday runner? I know you've seen it when you were at Big River there in St. Louis. Talk about that and some tips you might have for the everyday runner to take some of the things you guys do and apply to their world.

Yeah, when you and I were talking, I was super pumped because I totally believe in that philosophy. Since you brought up Big River, yeah, that was one of my favorite things that we did there in terms of creating a community around our stores. We would on our summer speed work sessions on Tuesday nights on the track or on our Sunday morning long runs during our marathon training in the spring, we would give these folks workouts that were based on essentially what I did in my own running. I'm not going to say watered down, but I would say adjusted for their ability level. I'll tell you the reason, and I know you know this, but the reason is that's fun. That's what people get hooked on. I mean, look, God bless you if you can run an easy five or ten miles every day, and that's all you do. I mean, I guess. I wouldn't be able to do it. The fun part for me was the workouts and the races. That's what people get hooked on. And this idea that I think was present for a long time in our industry that regular folks, age group athletes, were to be babied was a mistake. I think that was a big mistake. If you act like anybody can do it and it's easy, then what's the point of doing it? The people that stick with this for a long time are the people that get really into it, and they do workouts, and they know what their mile repeat pace is, and their 800 meter repeat pace is, and that's what we would do in our speed work sessions. We would give them a pace to run if their goal of 5K was 23 minutes. We would treat them like they ought to be treated, like athletes, because they are athletes. Everybody is an athlete. We're at different levels in terms of what we can produce on race day, but other than that, we're athletes. And so what you're saying is exactly what I believe in. And if anybody is getting into running as a beginner, I think the sooner you get a coach or some sort of program, like the program that you guys run, and start experimenting with workouts that are really going to improve your fitness, the sooner you're going to be super pumped about what you're doing and the more likely you are to be in it for the long haul.

Preach on that. On our last podcast, we had two athletes on, one who had qualified for the Olympic trials running a 243 and another who ran a 427 and got a 30-minute PR at CIM. Both of them actually train in the same group, doing the same workouts. And so part of our mission is to get that, quote unquote, back of the packer to believe that they're worthy of the same level goals, the same work, the same attention, and attention to detail provided by a coach that that fastest runner is worthy of. And so good to hear that perspective from you as well.

100%. I'm in agreement.

Now, last question, and then I'll let you go. Obviously, we've talked a lot about NAZ Elite, and you guys are very open as a part of your philosophy about sharing as much as possible about what you guys do including training schedules, everything else. People can obviously find more at nazelite.com, but what's the best way for people to follow along? What's upcoming that they should know about other than the release of the book Inside a Marathon so that we can build more fans of NAZ Elite?

Well, follow us on social media. We're very, very active, and our social media is very calculated. It's very much based on creating more fans and interacting with those fans, sharing every part of our journey. So on Twitter, it's just at NAZ underscore Elite. Same thing on Instagram, at NAZ underscore Elite. You can follow me at CoachBenRosario1 on Instagram or at Twitter at BenRosario1. Let's see, what else can you do? You can sign up for our newsletter, so you can do that on our website, nazelite.com. Every single race that we run, we send out a newsletter beforehand, previewing the race and updating you on what's going on. You can also on our website, click on the tab that says logs, and you can go in, and I think you referenced this in the podcast, you can read our daily training logs via Final Surge. Final Surge is our partner, is one of our partners, and they do a great job with everything they do, but you can read Scott Fauble's log, Steph Bruce's log, Kellyn Taylor's log, et cetera, everybody on our team. You can go on our videos page and check out tons of content there, or our podcasts page, our news page. You could really waste a day at work on our website, I think. So, you know, those are just a few of the ways. And then as you follow us on the web, I would just encourage you to follow each of our athletes as well, because they each do a great job in their own way of sharing their personal journey.

And I would say also support your sponsor, Hoka, because they do a good job not only of supporting you guys, but telling stories within our sport, which is so, so important to continue to build a friendship. So thank you, Ben, we really appreciate it. This has been an awesome interview, and thanks to everybody for listening. This has been episode 104 of the Running Rogue podcast. As always, you can check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Instagram, Twitter or Facebook, and go buy the book Inside a Marathon to be released soon at nazelete.com. We'll talk to you guys next time.