Hey, everybody, it is episode 41 of the Running Rogue Podcast. This is Chris coming at you from Austin, Texas. As always, Steve, my co-partner in crime is here with us. Hey, Steve.

Hello, Podcast World. I am fired up about this topic. I'm going to have some fun today.

And he's got a beer in front of him, which means we will all have fun today. So we're going to be talking, we're going to kind of call this our fall marathon preview episode. We're going to take it in a couple of parts. The first part is we're going to do some fall race previews. So we're going to give you our predictions and what to watch for in Berlin and in Chicago, which are two big fall marathons coming up. And then the second half of this podcast, we're going to give you some tips for those that are racing fall marathons from Twin Cities to Portland to Chicago to New York and Philly and CIM later in the season. We want to give you some tips, some reminders on what to be thinking about as you prepare for your race. So there you go, Steve. Let's start with Berlin, because that will be the first in the order that people see Berlin happening at the end of September. Let's see if I get my calendar out. September 24th will be Berlin Marathon Sunday.

When will this episode come out?

This episode will come out for these. They'll listen to it the Monday before that. So on the 18th.

Perfect timing.

So perfect timing.

So hopefully we won't be irrelevant by somebody dropping out or a new edition or something else. I don't think so for this first one.

So upcoming this Sunday, as you're listening to this, is the Berlin Marathon. Huge, huge race. We've already kind of teased it with the announcement that we made an episode or a couple of episodes ago that Bekele was in this race, huge, huge men's race. So we've got to start there. There's three guys to talk about in this race, all that have run under 204 and all with PRs within 10 seconds of each other. Kipchoge, of course, Elliot Kipchoge, the great one, winner of seven of his eight marathons. Wilson Kip sang, former world record holder, as it was before Dennis Cameto recently said it, and the only man to ever run four times under 204, which is insane. Then, of course, you have Bekele, Kinesia Bekele, who is both the 5K and 10K world record holder and has only run six seconds off the marathon world record himself, who is maybe the greatest distance athlete of all time. We'll save that debate for another day. But certainly has had crazy success at all levels, from track, world championships, Olympics, indoors, world cross. He has won 23 global championship medals. So, I mean, this is it. This is like McGregor versus Mayweather, maybe.

Yes. In the running world, we haven't seen it. I think somebody made the comment that we hadn't seen anything like this since 2002, when we had Khalid Kanuchi racing against Turgot and Gabor Selassie. Funny, in that race, everyone was talking Turgot and everyone was talking Gaeb, and the unheralded completely, and you and I both agree on this one. Dope to the gills Moroccan, who then became an American, stole it away from them. But that day, I remember I had just come back to working back in the running world after wandering the world and doing other things. And it was like I hadn't been paying attention to track and field for a good four to five years. And I paid enough attention to know who Gaeb was and know who Turgot was. And I knew Kanuchi was because one of my former teammates had raced against him a few times, and he had told me the guy's a stud, and he'd run really well. But that race had such a galvanizing excitement for the fan base of when I was at Run Techs, people were talking about it in the days and weeks preceding it. I think this, I'm paying way more attention now than I did before. This is even better. I mean, this is Olympians, world record holders all getting close to the top of their game or maybe in some of their cases, as we'll argue, maybe Chris, getting a little long on the tooth or a little over the edge. It's interesting to play that game. That's one of the lines that plays out here. I think there's a couple of different lines we can take here, Chris. One is to discuss the three players, strengths or weaknesses. That's one way to go. Another thing we can do is talk about, is this going to be a race or is this going to be a world record? Because even up to yesterday, there was new stuff that came out. Kenny B, as I'm calling him now, Kenny B made a statement that sort of made me have to think twice about what my picks were. So I don't know which way you want to go first. Do you want to go through?

Well, I want to start personally, I think we can get to the individual accolades at some point as we have this discussion. But for me, I want to start with the context because to me, in order to understand this race, you have to understand the history of these men facing each other. And for me, that goes back to 2003 Paris World Championships and perhaps the greatest world championship 5, 000 meter race ever with Kichoge, 18 year old Kichoge facing off against Hicham El-Gurouj, still the mile world record holder, 1500 world record holder, versus Bekele, who would be the 5K and 10K world record holder.

I think many people will call Hicham El-Gurouj the greatest miler of all time. His track record certainly speaks for it. There are a few people who will argue with me about that, but we're talking different eras and different times. Nobody was on top for as long and had set as many records and done as much as he's done. So you had the best in the world, the 15, certainly at the time and perhaps the best ever at the 15, moving up to the 5 against the greatest in the world. At that point, for sure, in Canonese Bekele coming down to his shorter distance race at the 5K, these guys were going head to head, and this little pipsqueak, who had just won World Junior Cross, is now in the final, and what a race. You said you just watched it recently. Give us a little taste of what you saw in that race.

So first of all, more context. So Garouge was doubling, just like Bekele in that World Championships. He had already won the 15. He was doubling back to the 5. Bekele had already won the 10, was doubling back to the 5. So the storyline, the question, the debate for the pundits was which of those two guys is going to be the greatest of the meet by getting that double goal? And no one was mentioning Kichoge. There was another Kenyan, and I'm going to butcher his name, who's sort of an unknown now, in the race that had a better resume than Kichoge. And Kichoge, 18 year old kid, nobody was talking about him. In fact, the announcers didn't even know his name until they could clearly were searching for him in the final lap when he was still in the race.

Such an embarrassment.

So Kichoge wasn't even in the storyline. The storyline was Bekele versus El Garouge and those two facing off to see who could double, get double goals at that meet. And Bekele took it out hard from the gun, knowing that he had to burn off the kick of the faster miler. And so he went to the front and with absolutely no fear, started just clicking off 60 seconds, sub 60 second laps.

And for another little bit of context too, so people know who may not have paid it, you probably don't know that much about the sport or at least the 1500, Hicham El-Garouge not only was the greatest 1500 meter runner at the time and perhaps of all time, but he had a very distinct racing style over the final 600 to 800 meters. He ran the race very similarly, nearly the same way every time, where he would do what he would get to the front at about 600, 800 to go and he would control the race. And he would not let anybody come by him. So Bekele knew that it very likely, given that that was his modus operandi, that that's what he was gonna do. So he wanted to do everything he could possibly do to keep him from getting into that position.

Right, he wanted to jettison him before that point.

Correct, he wanted to shake the tree of the leaves.

What happened in the race, which went incredibly fast and still to this day is the world record, or is the world championship meet record. He did that, but it didn't work. Garouge was still in the mix with the 1200 and two mile ago and Bekele backed off as a result, knowing that he hadn't cracked him. So he had to save a little bit and try to win the kick. And so he kind of backed up things, bunched up again. And then with 800 to go, like clockwork, Garouge went to the front, started to make that long kick and tried to control the race with a lap to go. Five guys went with him. It was the four Kenyans plus, well, yeah, five guys, four Kenyans plus Gal Garouge plus Bekele in this final mix with two laps to go as the pack started to pull away, that front pack started to pull away. And to everyone's surprise, the guy running in second was not Bekele. It was Kichoge in the mix right behind Gal Garouge, sitting right on his shoulder, making him do the work as if he also knew what was gonna happen from a strategy standpoint. And Bekele started to stretch out a little bit. He'd done a lot of early work and he kind of cracked. So as they went into the last lap, he was, Kichoge was basically a meter behind Gal Garouge, Bekele was three or four meters behind, almost off the back with everybody else strung out behind that. And as they went into that final 150, Kichoge came around Gal Garouge as he started to fade because of the such a long race and just literally out kicked the miler himself. And honestly, Gal Garouge, if he had kept his feet about him in the final 10 meters, he kind of started to swim and stumble and stopped kind of letting his stride flow through. If he'd done that, he would have won because it was a photo finish at the end. But Kichoge, smooth operator all the way to the line at 18, well, allegedly 18 years old. We all know that the Kenyans sometimes kind of fudge their ages a little bit, but he was a young one, certainly new to that global championship level and beat the great Al Garouge and the great Kanasay Bekele at their own game before anybody knew his name. And so to me, that's the context. These guys have history and I wonder what it's like for the two of them, especially for Bekele, to look at little Kichoge and think, man, this is the guy that stole my thunder back in 03. Now, the next year in Athens, Al Garouge won the 5K, Bekele got second. So they got their revenge against Kichoge in Athens the next year who got bronze in the 5K. But there's some history with these guys and I wonder how that plays out.

Yeah, I think that's an interesting... I think though one of the things that's changed since those early years is there's been a big storyline change. Kichoge sort of went away for a while, didn't have the same results. He was moving towards becoming a great marathoner in those years, you know, 06, 07, 08, 09 when Bekele was unstoppable and beatable and was on top of the world. And then he came back, he's now, and then Bekele over the last three to five years has sort of slipped and we didn't hear much from him. He got a number of significant injuries and sort of fell off, off of ever, not necessarily, nobody that good, nobody people would consider the greatest of all time ever falls off everybody's radar. But there was just disappointment. Did he ever extend his stay? Had he spent too much time doing the 5K, 10K should he have moved up earlier? And at that time, Kichoge then became the heir apparent for marathoning. Now, of course, the third guy here we're talking about was the king of the marathon a little bit in between. And he has, I think he won somewhere in the vicinity of 11 out of 12 marathons in a streak two. And we, you know, you talk-

He's won eight out of 12.

Okay, but there was a window where he had won like seven out of eight again too, but he has now lost a few. One of which was last year, Berlin. So man, I mean, we could spend an entire episode on this.

Well, that's the thing is like these guys, they have history together. So Kip Sang, who's sort of the unsung hero of this group, he doesn't get the same recognition as the other two, but has a pretty legit resume. He's the only guy to ever beat Kipchoge in a marathon in Berlin in 2013 by almost a minute when he set the world record at 203.23 back in the day. And then of course, last year as you referenced, Bekele is a defending champion. He beat Kip Singh, Wilson Kip Singh in Berlin last year in 2016, finishing first and nearly setting the world record. Bekele ran 203.03 last year in Berlin. So there's history between all these guys. And to me, that's as much a part of this storyline as trying to get a world record or who wins this race is that both these guys have beaten each other and back and forth. So it's not like there's one dominant figure in this mix is sort of beating everybody. It's like everybody has some scalps in this trio. And if you look at it, it's interesting to me, I think it's most interesting to look at the marathon credentials for these three. If you want to try to suss out.

Otherwise you're gonna overly, you're gonna give Kenny B too much credit, right?

Right, yeah. If you're gonna suss out kinda how this is gonna play out in terms of recent, we gotta look at marathon credentials. We know Kipchoge, he's run two hours and 25 seconds on a paced scenario with the Nike Breaking Two project. He's won seven out of eight marathons, although major marathons, although the one he lost was Berlanda Kipsang. Wilson Kipsang, as I said, he's won eight out of 12 marathons, been on the podium three other times. So 11 out of 12, he's been in the mix for the win. He's also, as I said, the only guy who's run under 204, not just once, twice, but four times. And he was a former world record holder. And then you have Bekele, who his resume is deep when it comes to non-marathon events. As I said, he's won 23 global world championship level medals. 20 of those gold, by the way. But with the marathon, his results are mixed. He's raised seven major marathons. He's DNF'd twice. He's got five finishes. Of the five finishes, he's won two of those. So two out of five. And he's been on the podium a couple other times, and he has a fourth place finish. So his marathon resume isn't that good, especially as you compare it to the other two guys. So with that as context, Steve, let's get your picks, and then I'll give you mine.

All right, so I think, well, before I give you my picks, I want to discuss world record verse race, because I think that that's an important part of the, a part of what might happen here, because I am trying to think, so I saw an article that came out, I saw it today, I don't know if it came out yesterday or whatever, where somebody quoted Bekele saying, he's targeting, quote, just the world record. And so I didn't know, and it was the way it was said, and he said that he was prepared to run 201.30. So, but the way that it was written, the way that it was written from a website in, somebody took it from an early press conference for this race, and it was stated maybe in the context that Bekele said that his focus is at this point in time in his career on just the world record, and that he believes he's prepared before he retires to run 201.30, which sounds a lot more in alignment with what Kenenece has been. He's never been in a big talker. He's never been an over-stater. He's always been somebody who sort of is quiet about what he thinks he's gonna do. So I think that this was a little bit of a misquote and maybe not quite, but it did take me back for a second and said, if Bekele's just focused on the world record, we know Kipsang would like to win, but his best strategy is to run as fast as possible and hopefully go for the world record himself. And Kichoge just, he's stated multiple times that Berlin was going to be his place to go for the world record. So at this point in time, the only person we don't have definitive statements saying they're gonna go for a world record is Kipsang, who we pretty much as a former world record holder wants to win a world record. So here we have three guys who seems to be at least stated or unstated aim is to set the world record. It creates an incredibly complicated and unusual way of looking at this race. Because if you said this is just gonna be a foot race between all three of them, this is my picks. My initial pick would be Kipchoge for the win, because the man knows how to win. I would put Kipsang in second, because I think Kipsang will make the race go fast enough that Bekele might not be able to hold it, right? But then I sat back and thought, okay, but Kipsang had Bekele on the ropes last year in the same race, on the same course, doing the same tactics. Bekele backed off as he's been known to do occasionally, regrouped, gathered himself, didn't wait for a chink in the armor from Kipsang, but just roared back, got up on Kipsang, and got away from him over the last bit and beat him by 10 seconds. So then I had to think, okay, but that's not what's gonna happen. These guys are gonna all supposedly go for the world record. So if I think that that's what's gonna happen, I'm actually gonna change my picks. So I think this race, the way it's gonna play out, is like this. There's gonna be no communication through the three of them. They're gonna sit around and look at each other for the first mile, two miles. Kipsang will just go to the front, do the work, if Kipchoge hasn't already decided from the gun to go for the world record, right? And Bekele ain't goin' for no world record. Bekele might get a world record, but he ain't gonna go for a world record. And so now you've got like two guys goin' out. I think what's gonna happen is Kenanessi Bekele is gonna win this race. I'm goin', can he be for the win? He needs it more than anybody else needs it. I think Kipchoge's tired. There are rumors out there that Kipchoge is more tired from his two-hour assault than we know. Kip Sang has been beaten by Bekele. Bekele knows how to beat him. And Kip Sang's gonna run a race that will be not very different from what happened the year before. And I think Bekele's fit and ready to go. He didn't run the World Champs on purpose, even after making a bunch of noise about the year before being left off the team and not running. And I think Bekele is going to want to cement and to prove. And if he wins this race, in my opinion, if he wins this race in a world record, drop the mic, he could walk away. It's over. Any argument that Kennedy C. Bekele is not the greatest marathoner of all time will be ended by him winning Berlin in a world record. I don't think he will walk away. I think he'll take a couple of paydays down the road. But I think the way the race is going to play out, two guys are going to burn each other up. One in Kichoge, who I have eminent belief in, fresh. He came off an Olympic gold medal. He went after a crazy time. And yeah, he's been set up to where his body might be able to handle it. But I'm hearing rumors that he might not be at 100%.

Gamesmanship, Steve, gamesmanship.

Could be, could be. Very much could be. So that's my pick for the win is Kenny B. I think if they're all together at the end of the race, I do think that Bekele will find a way to win. I don't think Kichoge has the same closing speed. If Kichoge's gonna win, he's gonna do it 5K out, 10K out. If they're all three together or two of them are together and Kenny B's with them for 800 meters to a mile to go, it's over. Kenny B's gonna win. So Kenny B for the win, Kichoge in second. I think he'll hang on. I think Kip Sane is gonna be a bit of a sacrificial lamb. The bonus is, is the world record broken? And I say the world record will be broken because I think all three are gonna go for it and they won't blow up. So I think Kenny B will walk away with the world record and a win. That is my picks. I know I'm blowing Chris' mind. Chris has grabbed his headphones. He's about to throw them on the ground. He's like, I can't believe you just called it that way.

Wow. Wow.

Now I'm pretty sure I know how you're gonna call it.

Unbelievable. That you would go against your man. That'll be interesting. If it plays out that way, you're right. Bekele can sort of hang him up and say, look, I did it. I broke the world record, and I did that against the stiffest competition in the history of marathoning.

Now Kichoge also has that need for that world record because he doesn't have it. It's the one thing he is missing right now to be consistent. I absolutely agree. But dude, we have no idea, physiologically, what two hours.

Did to him.

Did to him. We don't. And it may be that the word coming out is smoke and mirrors and gamesmanship and everything else, but we know you saw him over the last 2K of that race. There was absolutely nothing left. He did not die. He is crucial that way, right? But again, this race, it was hard to call it, but I just think Kenny B has more to race for and he has had less alkalis and he needs this.

Interesting. Interesting.

And he hasn't raced in a while. We don't really know where he is.

We don't. Well, and to me, that to me is sort of the linchpin of this whole thing is where is he really? He raced in London, got second, which by all accounts is solid, but in only 205.57, close to 206, which is a far cry from 203 or sub-203. So I'm banking on the fact that I think Bekele has run his fastest marathon already.

Yeah, Berlin was his, last year was his.

2003, Berlin last year, to me, that was his best shot at getting a world record. I don't think he's going to run that again. I think his teeth are too long at this point. So I'm going to go with what I thought you might have predicted, even though that's not why I'm picking it. But Kichoge, the man, because I don't think he would race if he wasn't ready. And he just wins, you know, when it comes to the marathon, he just wins. And physiologically, we know he can run a sub 203 because we've seen him run a lot faster than that.

Yes, we have.

And in a paced race at Berlin, which, by the way, the last six world records for the men have come from Berlin. So this is a fast, fast course, fast race. I'm picking Kichoge, Kip sang Bekele. I think Kip sang benefits in this case, because he'll have somebody else to do the work.

You don't think Bekele is going to be there when the real race, I don't think he's going to be there. when it really happens. So that makes total sense that you would pick it that way.

And I think Kip sang will benefit from the fact that he'll be able to chase Kipchoge, because Kipchoge won't be afraid to do work. Whereas in the past, Kip sang has been the one that's had to do the work oftentimes in his efforts. So I think Kipchoge and Kip sang break the world record. Bekele does not. And Kipchoge gets the win.

Yep.

That's my prediction.

I'm not surprised at that. And I think that that's a great prediction. I mean, I think that that's probably the way the odds bettors would play it all out. But what happens if Kenny B doesn't get pushed off? And with three miles or four miles to go, he's still there.

I mean, in a lot of ways, I hope that happens because then it'll be amazing television. I hope I'm wrong.

I think it's going to be a wonderful race, even in your scenario. I think it's going to be a wonderful race between Kipchoge and Kip Sang. I just unfortunately don't think I think we haven't seen Kip Sang win a tight one. So I, you know, and Kipchoge has won many tight ones, many, many tight ones. And Bekele beat Kipchoge a year ago. I think I think Bekele has been targeting this race since since last year.

Yeah, so we will see. So there's there you go. There's our predictions. But but people, this is going to be happening while you're sleeping potentially. Find a way to follow it or at least to look up the results and find a replay.

They'll be out there.

Even if you're a French fan, this this is going to be one to pay attention to.

It could be the greatest conglom. Greatest put together three three best marathoners ever running. I mean, three best marathoners at the height of their powers racing against each other. We're not going to see the likes of it because this sport is not known, especially in high level marathoning with a number of majors and how they come with rapidity and big paydays. You're not going to see it again, which is why we won't see Rupp in this race.

Right. So OK, so that's the men's side of Berlin. Let's talk women's side probably much quicker because it was it's clear to me that they kind of invested their appearance fee money in the men's race on this one. But still a decent and pretty decently stacked women's field. You've got two Kenyans and four Ethiopian athletes sort of battling for the win. Six women that I think have a chance in this one. Although honestly, it's a little bit tricky, I would say, other than IABA, the one Kenyan, the other one that's been a little while since we've seen a big result or at least a PR result. So to me, this one was harder to kind of digest and predict. And some of these names aren't names that you often hear, right? They're kind of, they're not your Kipligots and your Dababas of the world, so to speak. So you've got a little bit more homework to dig into this field. What are your thoughts on the women's field first before we get to predictions?

I mean, I think that the women run these marathons in such a different way. You know, there's not as much gamesmanship. There's not as much strategy. With the big three on the men's side, it's going to play out in a different way than normal. But I think with this race, you pretty much just have to look out and say, okay, what are the last races? What are the last performances? What are big performances and who shows up on race day? I mean, I think there are like five women who have gone under 223, so that means that really at that point in time, maybe even more, but at that point, anybody can win. But I think you've got a known winner and you've got a person in this race who to me, when I look at it, I'm just like, there's your winner. I don't even know if I can pick two to three because I think it will be potentially different people. But ultimately, in my opinion, I think you're going to see Gladys Cherono in a position where she's just head and shoulders above everybody else. And the only person is the Kenyan girl. I can't remember what her name is. The Kenyan girl who won last year. What's her name?

Last year was Ethiopian, Kibidi.

Yeah, Kibidi, that's what I meant. Kibidi was won in a really striking way. We haven't seen her really since. And so I think that they could have a great race, but I just think Cherono, not only does she run faster than everybody, but she's been in big races and she's won big races. Not that Kibidi's win at Berlin last year wasn't big, but I just think Cherono's going to have the stuff to get it done. How the race plays out, I'll be honest with you, my focus has been on Berlin to this day. I paid way more attention to the women's race at Chicago than I did at Berlin. I just think that it is against somebody who's run the race and won the race versus the old hat, who's still not that old. She's not even, I think she's like 32 or something. It's not like she's really old. I just think Cherono's going to be the better.

One thing you have to remember is about this race for our listeners is that Berlin is a paced race. So they're going to have pacers. The intent is to go fast. With Chicago, it's not a paced race. So it will be a very different dynamic. And I think in paced races, typically the fittest athlete on paper can win or typically wins. In a race, you never know because tactics come into play. So that's where things get interesting. I'm not so sure, to be honest, on Gladys Cherono. She won this race in Berlin in 2015, but you looked at her result in Boston this year in 2017. And what did she do there? It wasn't what I even think I predicted her in that... And then she kind of fell on her face a little bit. So I'm not convinced that she's going to be ready to roll. So I actually had... I'll go first on this one. I think my predictions are a little bit different. I think this one's a bit of a... I want to say crapshoot between these six women. Really maybe between four of them. I'm going to go with the younger Kenyan, Ira Bay, for the win. She won Prague earlier this year. And as we saw in the World Championships, with those that won Boston having good success and Prague being a little bit earlier than Boston, I think I'm going to go with the horse that had the best, most recent race. And Ira Bay won Prague, and even though it was a little bit slower, 223. She's a little bit younger athlete, and I think just proving her potential. So I'm going to go with her for the win. I'm going to go with Khabidi for second defending champion and Cherono for third. So she still makes the podium, but isn't quite where she wants to be. So how does that compare to you?

I'm going Cherono, Khabidi, and then Valerie Aiebe. So you're winner. I'm just flipping them, right? So we're putting two at the same spot, but the one and the three, the sandwich of Kenyans, we've got different Kenyans in different spots.

Well, there you go.

I mean, of course, Aiebe's run 221, so it's not like she's some kind of schlub.

She's not. To be clear, she's not.

Yeah.

So there you go. That's the women's race. Now let's turn to Chicago. And since you were just mentioning your excitement about the women's race in Chicago, let's start there. Since we started with the men in Berlin, break down the women's field for Chicago for us.

So this one is like, I don't know, it's going to be, in a lot of ways, it's going to be this giant, it's going to be a big argument of the old versus the new, but the new is still old, right? So the old being Florence Kipligot, who's best year, who ran at 219 in 2011. Like, I mean, we were talking about Bekele and Kichoge, and they're running in 2003, but they weren't marathoning at this point. This is many, many years of many multiple marathons ago she ran at that time, but she's still a known quantity who knows how to get it done in races.

And the defending champion, by the way.

Correct, and knows how to race well. And I think that, and then you've got the new, who's really old, and that's in Tirunesh Dibaba, who just ran the 10K at the World Championships, got second to Superwoman, and a woman that was not going to be beat in 10, 000 meters by many, many men. So no one was going to beat her. So, and I think based on watching that race, and you and I talked about this in our 10K post-race, how Dibaba looked a lot like she had sort of not chased Ayanna on that day. Ayanna being the woman who did actually run away and win the Women's 10, 000 Meter Championship at the World Championships. I think Dibaba's been playing her paydays just right. Unlike Bekele, she did her duty to her country and ran her 10, 000 meters. And Bekele, who talked a big smack about doing it and being willing to go fight for his country at any point in time, didn't actually do it. Not sure what the myriad of reasons are for there, but he didn't. And I think Dibaba, and so you've got these two poles, I think, when you look at this race. And they are the two women who are light years ahead of everybody else in terms of what they've actually done and their competitiveness. To keep in mind for everyone, Dibaba ran 217. She ran under 218 at London in 2017, so this year. So it's not like we're talking about the new as being someone who's unproven. This is somebody who has absolutely gotten it done at the highest level. She didn't win that race, right? She was second, wasn't she?

She got second.

To who? Who was it that won that? I can't remember who won that race. But anyway, I think that this has been a part of her plan for a while. She too is looking for her best effort, unfortunately. I mean, at this point in time, world records are on the books for the women as well, right? So because the world record is the one that's so fast is really not there anymore, right? So the 215 is no longer on the books, is that correct?

Right.

So I think you could be looking at a world record attempt here as well.

If she had Pacers, that's the part that I don't quite understand. To me, this race is interesting because Dababa seems so far above everybody else. You know, so it will be interesting to me to see her strategy. Does she just go off the front?

And that will be the race to me. That will be the race is if she goes off the front, then she is not a foregone conclusion that she will win, but it's a foregone conclusion that the TV coverage will be really bad because there will be nothing to talk about until the final two to three miles in which Florence Kipligaard and a little tiny blonde haired girl who comes from Southern California could suddenly, and Jordan Hasay, could suddenly come to the fore because of a hard press for that. So I honestly think if this race plays out the way I think it will, Tyranesh will sit and wait for a little bit and then push off the front and run away kind of like Edna Kipligaard did at Boston and make it a done deal and try to get away at 18, 16, 18 or 20 and then try to run away. And we may see a replay for Jordan where she's got the opportunity to be in a big game race and what has changed for her. We haven't seen any big time races from her, although we did see a really solid, pretty substantive win from her at New Haven 20K now a couple weeks ago. So she's ready to roll, she's ready to go. Is she in 220 shape? Can she run that fast? That's the big question for Jordan. Is she going to be in a position to do that? The rest of these ladies, there's an argument for almost none of them other than those three. And I think there's some people who might actually say that there's no argument for Jordan, but I just think she's cagey and smart. I think you too, Chris, I was just absolutely impressed with her Boston performance. And so I don't put her out of it. You know what I mean? I don't put her out of it. I think that there's a chance there. So you tell me how you think the race will play out. What do you think the kinds of the way the races are going to roll?

I think you've kind of teed it up. You've got DiBaba, who's head and shoulders above from a PR standpoint, and she demonstrated she's got this 10K speed already. That world's getting this over there. In London, you've got Kibla Gott, who's sort of the veteran. She won last year, but really because it ended up being a little bit of a slower race. And she played her cards right at the end. You've got Jordan Hasay, the new up and coming young American, who shows promise. And then that's kind of it. I tend to think that Dababa will sit back a little bit, kind of let the race play out for maybe 15 miles, maybe even 17 miles, 18 miles, and then just go, and then it'll be it. It'll be over from a first place standpoint. And then Hasay and Kibla Gott will be battling it out for second. And maybe you'll have another face in there. You know, Kibkateer from Kenya is another one. You've got this Mexican athlete in the race, Perez, who's run a 2.22 in Chicago, but it was a long time ago. Ten years ago. I don't think she's going to be in the mix. So anyway, I think it's going to be Hasay versus Kibla Gott for second and third. And in this case, I like Jordan. So to me, it's Dababa runs away with it first place. Hasay wins the battle for second. And Kibla Gott rounds out the podium in third.

So that's my intellectual pick. The question is, will Dababa chase a world record on a super fast course that she's obviously prepped and ready for? She's run 2.17. She's close to that. She had a pace race before, but this is a person who knows how to, is a controlled runner who knows how to get it done. If she goes for it and she falters, she's going to falter badly. But the thing is, if she's on pace to run, you know, 2.17 low, 2.16, she's even dying, missing it, getting it wrong. We're talking about a four to five minute miss. And there's no way that Jordan is going to be close enough to be able to pick that off. So I think that in, I do think that that's an interesting scenario. No one ever wants to see somebody dying. And Tirenesh has a last name that says the word savvy and knows how to race. Let's just take Jin Zebi out of the picture, who was a bit of a jack wagon when it comes to racing. But Tirenesh is arguably the greatest. Before Ayanna, she was the best 10K runner of all time on the women's side. And so I think she's cagey, she's smart, she's going to run a bright race, she's going to win. I think Jordan is going to get second, and I think Kit Bagaat will get third. I'm picking it exactly the same way you do, but I'm interested to see if Dababa will go for it. I hope she does, just for the case of seeing if that happens. The problem is, as you stated, Chris, Chicago has been trumped by, strategically in this race, on both the men's and the women's races, but in the women's especially, from turning something into an amazing, crazy, psycho-abasing... They could have had the Berlin of Berlin here, by getting some of those women, like a Toronto, and the other ones who were running in Berlin, and brought them to this race, if they could have done it. But the fact that they've chosen to get on their high horse about not providing pacers, on a race course that's super flat, and that can have problematic wins and problematic scenarios for running super fast, I just think that Chicago has not made a good choice here. But we're about to talk about the men's race, and in that case, it changes things, so it's kind of interesting.

Yeah, the other thing I would say about this women's race is that that spot, the third podium spot, could be wide open, depending on what happens with Kepa Gott and the form that she's on. So you're going to look for Lisa Waidman, potentially from Australia, coming in to potentially snag a podium spot. You've got, I mean, on a good day, Becky Waid, who we've talked about in the 20K, finished fourth recently in the 20K. You know, her PR is slow in the context of this group, but depending on how the race plays out, she could be in the mix if she has a breakthrough to get a podium spot, which would be really exciting to see. So I do think the more interesting races to watch as a fan are second and third and then third and fourth to see who gets those last two podium spots on the women's side. All right, let's turn to the men's. Galen Rupp's big world major coming out party. To this point, he's raced at the Olympic trials. He's raced at Rio, but never a world major marathon. He ran Boston.

He ran Boston.

So this is his second world major. I'm losing my mind over here. Second world major after Boston. And got second in Boston. I believe you picked him for the win, if I remember correctly. Stupidly. But he ran into the buzzsaw that is Geoffrey Karui.

And then I didn't pick Karui again for the marathon. But again, I won't make... Now, that would be fun at Berlin to have Karui there, but it would be... That's just no way.

Yeah, right.

I'd pick him for the win. End of story.

As we talked about a couple of episodes ago, this is a pretty thin men's field. You have added the Rio Olympic silver medalist Faiza Lalisa to the mix now. And you've got last year's winner in Abel Karui from Kenya, as well as Rupp. And then Dennis Kamado, sort of by name at least, the current world record holder is here, although he hasn't had a decent race since 2014. So this is another one that's kind of interesting. It's a fairly thin front group. Last year, the race went out really slowly for the men, even slower than the women, which allowed kind of Abel Karui to get that win. So how do you think Rupp plays this one? You know, because to me, part of the reason why you do a Chicago is to prove that you can run faster than his current PR, which is a 209.58 from Boston. So, you know, but if you look at the field, there's not a lot of other guys that are going to be doing work to push the pace.

So I think that, you know, the conspiracy theorist in me is like, who sponsors Abel Karui? Because if he's sponsored by Nike, they're very well maybe a pacer in this race. So you know what I mean? And I don't, I don't, certainly Kometo is not going to, Kometo I know is Adidas. And I know that Kometo is, while he's past his prime, he's certainly thumping his chest and looking for a big race. And I think Kometo will, he's not, Kometo is not known for winning big races. He's known for running fast. Unlike Kipsang, who's been known to win big races and beat in the mix with big racing. You know, Kometo and Kipsang are birds of a different feather. And so I think Kometo, maybe there's a, you know, not being sponsored by, you know, having a Ditas athlete against a Nike athlete, there's no way that somebody's setting something up for somebody. But it could be that that play gets played. I just don't, I've never seen Galen run a race ever, where he's gone to the front from the beginning and make it happen. So I just don't see a change to that. I think they're looking for their win. I think they're looking to get their win. And this is a dangerous game. This is a dangerous game for Galen because Karui's a known quantity who knows how to run fast and get the job done. He's also run, to this point, I mean, he's run four minutes faster. And he's running against another guy who's run seven minutes faster.

And he's won a race in the race last year that started slowly and closed fast.

I think this is a real dangerous play for Rupp. Now, I'm a little more encouraged by the race result that he got at New Haven. I think that him running in a tight race and out kicking and staying the course is good. I see a lot of danger things, but the one thing that's gonna tip my hat is that Galen is gonna be incredibly well prepared for this race. They have a plan, they have a reason why they're doing what they're doing. We don't necessarily aren't in on it and we don't know what it is. No matter how it plays out, I just don't see how Galen Rupp gets beat here. So I think that he, I think it could be interesting, I think it could be a challenge and it might not go to script the way that Alberto thinks it's gonna go. Who knows how many people Alberto is coaching anymore, but the one thing we know for sure is he's coaching this guy. He's coaching Rupp and we know for sure he's coaching Hasay. Those two I'm certain of. Whether Pete Julian is coaching all the rest of those cats or who was doing what and what's happening, who knows. But we know these two marathoners are definitely under his tutelage. There's a plan in place. I trust that plan. Not that I'm a super fan of Alberto's. I just think that they've got a good plan. And I think Rupp's gonna get away with the win. I think he's gonna win the thing. And then I think Karubi's gonna get second. I think those two could be nip and tuck at it. Could very well be like we saw at New Haven where it's that close. But I think Rupp will find a way to win it. And then I kind of look around and say, will Kometo, what will Kometo do? Because this is the guy in this race that is sort of throws a wrench in the whole affair. Because he's so fast. And it's not like he's so far away from his very prime. I mean, he's, you know, three years away from his best. Which as we know, looking at Bekele, we would have said three years ago, Bekele's never going to come back ever again. We're never going to see him. And then he runs 2.0303 at Berlin. So is Kemeto ready to go? Yet to this day, he has not really shown other than that.

I think we know what he's going to do. He's going to DNF like he has in all of his last races. You know, to me, the thing that gives Rupp the edge, and I've got him for the win as well, is that there's nobody in this race that can gear change late that will put him on the edge. You know, Kuroe could do it because he did it in Boston. You know, Kipchoge could do it because he did it at the Olympics, but nobody in this race can suddenly drop a time of 430 mile and in at mile 20 and gap Rupp. So he's going to be in it till the end. Nobody's going to get away from him. Or I think he's going to take the win as well. And then it just becomes a question of who can get second. And is Lalisa, who got silver in Rio, is he on form? Has he been able to stabilize his training situation after getting exiled from his country in Ethiopia?

See, that's my worry. That's my worry. I didn't even, he's an Olympic silver medalist. He's beaten Rupp head to head in a big race. But he's had a lot of drama in his life right now. And I don't know how well he'll, I saw a picture of Chris Chavez in him. I don't know if you saw that one after he announced that he was gonna run the race. And he looks like an old man. He looks tired. He looks, this was just him in regular stand around clothes, right? Running shirt, but stand around clothes. And he just looks tired to me. And I worry about that. The one guy that's in this mix, Chris, that we haven't talked about yet, is a guy who was only 10 seconds behind Rupp.

Sam Chalanga.

Is Sam Chalanga. He was not that far behind. It's hard when you're in marathon training to shift gears. Sam hasn't been done in marathon training, so he could be dealing with a lot of what happens when those first judicial marathoners hit that first. They don't have the ability to shift and get away. Sam could be in there. Sam could be in there.

So could Chris Derrick, who's making his debut.

This is the other line of discussion that I want to talk about with this race. Because while we have a very lackluster front end in terms of what we call world major marathon, we have a significantly interesting kick ass fun US race in this race. We've got Chris Derrick in his debut, Sam Cillango for all intents and purposes in his debut. Bumbaloe, who ran this past year early at Tokyo, and I think he ran 2.13, who probably knowing his coaches was gauging and gaming it to be maybe 85% effort run. As we talk about that it could be entry level, that there was a plan to do something like that. I think Bumbaloe and think Chris Derrick and Bumbaloe trained together on a consistent basis. They've been locked and loaded. Schumacher's obviously got his marathon game going right now because he had Craig win a medal at the World Championships. I think that what we could see on the back end of this race, I don't think these guys are going to challenge Rupp in the race. And I think the race is gonna go slow enough that Rupp will get away and make it and he'll win it. But I'm super interested in these guys. There's also another guy in here. He ran last year at Chicago. He's not an American, he's a Kenyan, Steven Sambu. I watched him run in college. This guy's kind of like Chillinga. He's a sneaky, teeny tiny little Kenyan sneaky dude who also could be in the mix. He's only run 213, but he's definitely a sub 210 marathoner if not faster. What do you think the time is gonna be at this race, Chris? You think they're gonna run 208 maybe? 209, 208, 209?

Well, last year, Karui won a 210 high on a very, very slow race. I mean, I remember you and I were watching the race. The lead man came through and then not too far behind that was, you know, the second pack of guys. You weren't even supposed to be close.

Exactly. And we were like, what happened? Did they take a wrong turn?

Yeah, it's like, does something look off? So, you know, I think it's gonna be probably 209.30 or so. I think it won't be super fast, but I think it'll get going enough at the end, sort of like Boston, where they'll get at least under 210 this time. You know, you got me thinking about Lalisa. You know, he could be Nike's sacrificial lamb here to say, all right, we need you in the field, because it legitimizes the field.

Yep.

But-

Showed up late.

And we'll give you the payday, because we know you need the payday.

Yep.

But we're not worried that you're gonna ruffle feathers, but you'll at least make Rupp's win look more legit. Now I'm worried about that as this scenario, because I'm thinking, to me, it's Rupp, Lalisa, if he's on form, I think he gets second, and then Karui gets third. But I do think you've hit on the fact that the more interesting part of this race might be what happens to the other Americans, because I do think that Bumbalo, Chalanga, Derek, Noah Drati.

Noah Drati's in his debut, whoop, excited about that.

Luke Pasquedra, who's another guy.

Who's a known quantity, he gets it done.

Who's run 210 and gets it done. I think all of those Americans are gonna be in the mix, at least for the first 16, 18 miles until this race really takes off. So that's gonna be interesting. And so it'll be fun to have a bunch of US names in that group. I don't think any of those guys will have the staying power. For me, Chilanga, yeah, he raced well at the 20K, but he's been training more for the 10K and the 20K distance. I'm not sure he's ready to go up. He's already DNF'd once in a marathon, which is hard to kinda come back from. I'm not worried about him making too big of waves for the podium, but I do think it's interesting to see some of those Americans. And if somebody does something crazy, Chris Derrick could be the guy, because, you know, I've learned not-

He's your wild card?

He's my wild card. Because I've learned not to doubt Jerry Schumacher and his ability to get people ready no matter what history they have. So, anyway, those are my three. Rupp, Lalisa, Kerui. I think that's your podium in some order. But if Lalisa's just here to punch his ticket and get a payday, then it's wide open for that third spot. What are your picks?

Rupp, Kerui, Chalanga.

Ah, you've got Chalanga on the podium. Yes, yes. He's your wild card of sorts.

He's my wild, but I'm picking him. And I am interested in the back end. I think, I'm really interested to see what Bumbalo does. I'm super, Bumbalo's so wheelie and so fast. I worry that he's moved to the marathon too soon. But I would love to see, he's a guy who can run 207, 206. He's got the skill set, you know? Chris Derrick is a fast guy. He's a marathon, he uses good mechanics and good energy for the marathon. But he's been in such a tough spot over the last few years in terms of his race performances where Bumbalo has shown some things. So I'm really excited for Chicago to see what happens with that pack and see those guys. And they're running in sort of a preview of the Olympic Trials a couple years from now. And sort of the guys who we think are gonna be the major players going into the Olympic Trials will be showing up here. And it'll be fun to see how that all plays out. So excited for that.

That's a good point. Trials qualifiers will be on the line for these folks. So there you go, there's Chicago, hoping that Rupp can get his first major marathon win. He had the win at the Olympic Trials last year against US competition. We'll see if he can finally do it against, we'll put international competition quotes there because this isn't a full international field. It doesn't have the stable of Kenyans and Ethiopians you might expect, but a win in Chicago would still be a big win for an American. So there you go, folks. Over the next couple of weeks, you've got Berlin coming up. This coming Sunday, Chicago. This Sunday, I guess two Sundays later, happening on the October 8th, that first full weekend in Chicago. Watch, and you should be able to catch to Chicago after you wake up on your Sunday morning. Before we end this, as I said, we want to kind of cover the second chapter of this. We'll be helping you all prepare if you're getting ready for a fall marathon. For some key reminders, some things to think about as you prepare for your races, as we've talked about these elite races. And we want to do that in sort of a fun fashion we used for a previous talk, not a podcast, but a previous talk on marathon prep. We used this, I don't even remember what race it was for.

It was before fall marathons, before Chicago 2016.

Okay, so appropriately in time. So about a year ago, we used this similar talk. So now we'll be sharing it with the world. We kind of shared famous last words that we hear all the time from athletes who don't get their goals in marathons. We hear these words said too many times. And so we want to repeat them to you so that you can not make the same mistakes that some of our athletes have made in getting ready to achieve their goals, especially as it relates to these races coming up. So with that, Steve, I'm going to let you kick it off. We can just kind of alternate on a handful of these. What's your famous, maybe your most favorite, famous last words from athletes that you get post-race?

OK, so I'm going to start off since we're going to start early on in the race process. So before the race gets started, I love this one. The quote is, I found the cutest outfit to race in at the Expo, but now my thighs are bleeding. So that being a quote, basically, hey, plan your gear out beforehand. Make sure you've run and all the stuff that you're going to race in. Don't go to the Expo, wander around, and find just the perfect pair of shoes or these socks that you've never used before. Guys, this might seem like a really basic thing, but for some of you who might be making a marathon debut or haven't been down the road, this is more of a kind of what we might call a rookie mistake. We're trying to keep the rookies from making a rookie mistake here. Just be sure that you've tested all your gear out, you've dotted your I's, you've crossed your T's in terms of what you're gonna wear, you've used it in a final run or two, and if you haven't been able to use it in your final race prep workout, which should be coming up or about, or may have already happened, to at least have gotten a 10 or 12 mile run in the things that you're going to be racing in. And that includes your shorts, your shirt, make sure you got your nip guards on, gentlemen. Make sure your shoes are the ones that you've tested them out, you've already purchased them and you got them. Another version of this is, it's a week before my race, oh my God, my shoes are dead, what do I do? Well, you know, it's very hard in these day and age to actually pick out a brand new pair of shoes and run them the first time in a marathon. You're gonna be in a whole lot of pain. So the idea behind this famous last words is basically prepare, prepare, prepare, prepare, prepare, get your things out, execute a couple runs and all the stuff that you're gonna wear in your race and be sure that you're ready to go so that you have the chance, so you don't have the problem of making a stupid mistake and having a gear malfunction or an equipment malfunction be the end of your race.

And many of you, especially if you're doing Chicago, New York, you're gonna have some long runs between now and then, and they may not be 20 milers if you're doing Chicago, you might be a 10 miler or a 12 or 14 miler, but you've got long runs where you have a chance to practice this stuff. Use the gear, do a dress rehearsal, use the gear you're gonna use on race day and make sure it works for you. If it doesn't, switch it up, try it on some other runs until you get it right. But as Steve said, there is no excuse for trying something new on race day and having a blow up in your face. That is a silly, famous last word.

Yeah, I just thought I'd start with the rookie mistakes, just in case we've got a few rookies out there.

Sure. So, this one, I'll go next, and this one's kind of a hot topic because, well, no pun intended, although the pun works. Famous last words, I just looked at the weather and we are totally fucked, okay? Chicago is notorious for this as one example because it's been warm many of the last several years going into Chicago where people start to watch their weather app, you know, 14 or 10 days out from race day and start to get really, really nervous and concerned about it being too hot. And while that's an important thing to kind of think about and consider as it relates to your race plan, it's nothing to freak out about, right? What we like to say is, you know, talk to your coach and make the appropriate adjustments. For some people, you're gonna have to make a decision. Do I still go for it? Do I still kind of give it all and stick with my original plan if the weather's a little bit warm? And some people, that decision will be based on how they've typically done the heat or maybe how bad they want their goal or maybe how little they fear failure or how much or little they have to worry about that outcome as it relates to how the weather might affect them. But think about it, make a decision with your coach and either adjust or don't adjust your plan accordingly, but don't sit there and worry about it. This is not something you can control. Focus on what you can control, adjust your plan or don't, and then go execute it no matter what the weather says. I will say, for me, I do use some rules of thumb here as a coach, at least as it relates to adjusting your plan. So when the weather is north of 55, I tell people at the start, I tell people that a decent rule of thumb is adjust your goal pace per mile by 10 seconds per mile for every five degrees over 55. So if it's 60, you adjust 10 seconds a mile, 65, 20, 70, 30, from that start time temperature at least for the early miles until you know how it's gonna affect you. That's if you're gonna adjust, but I can also argue for certain athletes who are not affected by the heat as much, you don't adjust, you go for it anyway. But that's it. Control what you can control, don't worry about the weather. That's my famous last word, Steve.

Well, I'm gonna keep on with the weather theme since we've all, everybody's been running through terrible hot summer conditions. And I'm gonna flip it to the other side, Chris. We've gone through a hot summer of training, probably no matter where you are in the United States, and certainly if you're listening to us from Baghdad, as we now know we have a few Baghdad listeners, you've been running in the heat. And so sometimes people will get to a weather, a race and it'll be like 50, 55 degrees and have this to say. I felt so good in the first five miles. The weather was so cool and the energy of crowds had me all pumped up, so I just went with it. Those are famous last words, Chris, famous last words. You make that decision to jettison a plan and to overlook all the training that you've done. You have not listened to any of our mental training techniques that we've been discussing on these podcasts. You have a strategy, you've trained for a certain pace, stick to the race plan. In no scenario ever is there going to be good enough weather conditions for you to just go with it, to just decide after five miles that you're just gonna go with the flow and run based on energy. Because I guarantee what's gonna happen is you're gonna be at that half marathon position, two minutes, three minutes, maybe in some cases five minutes faster than you wanted to be or that you had planned to be. And Chris, we got a rule at Rogue. It's called the, it's the times three rule. That you will, you, whatever happens, if you run that first mile and you're, that first half marathon and you're a minute ahead of what you're hoping to run, I guarantee you'll run three minutes slower at the finish. I don't care what the weather conditions are. Assuming you didn't plan for that. If you're two minutes fast at the half marathon point, you're probably gonna end up six minutes slow. And if you're stupid enough to go five minutes faster at the half marathon than you thought, than you had planned, than you knew that your fitness was able to do because you just decided to wing it and go on energy and feel the crowds, you're gonna be upwards of 15 minutes slower for your marathon goal time. And those folks, those numbers, I am not making up just to try to make, just to try to get your attention. We have seen it happen over and over again. And in some cases, Chris, this is sort of conservative in the way that it plays out. Because some of these races, how many times have we been at races recently? Chicago won on Case and Point, 55 degrees at the start line where somebody might not make any of those adjustments, but it ends up at 80 degrees at the finish line. We've seen that two, three times now. Chicago has been known for this kind of scenario where we don't predict it. And so, hey folks, follow your plan. Don't change your plan based on good weather conditions. Follow and execute the plan.

Yeah, and don't get overly excited. I know because I just looked up the data before we started this, that if you look at the world records, all of them, the last three at least, and I think if you looked further back, you'd see this as well, are run on either slightly negative or even splits. Kometo ran and actually had a pretty big negative split. He ran just over 30 second, 33 second negative split from first half to second half to get the current.

That's pretty big for the best in the world.

And for those paces to get his world record, which some people indicated meant there was more to be had. He could have probably run faster that day had he gone just a little bit faster on the first half. Then Kip Singh's world record before that was a positive split, but by 13 seconds. So basically an even split. And then Patrick Macau, who set the world record before Kip Singh was a positive split by nine seconds, eight seconds. So basically even split.

Even splits, yeah.

So the moral of the story is you don't bank time, you bank energy, save it for the end.

There are still coaches out there, Chris, suggesting a bank for people. And when I hear that, I'm just like, in no scenario, I mean, if I were given the choice, I would tell people to try to shoot for a five minute negative split over a two minute positive split bank time. Oh yeah. You know what I mean? I mean, optimally, we do what we try to get our athletes to do this just right is they time it just right for them to have their fitness designed, they know where their current fitness is, create a plan that indicates that and execute it so that you get a near even split race, or at least an even split between your first and your second half, depending on how you run it. Very hard to do, but certainly one of the goals that we try to aspire to.

Okay, next one, I'll go. So famous last words. My Garmin said I was running 1430s and then 445 and then 1430s again, but I know I wasn't running 1430 pace. I kept speeding up and slowing down and just couldn't find a rhythm. Chicago is notorious for this because you go through that early tunnel and then you're running amidst the buildings, tall downtown buildings where the satellite connection isn't strong, so your Garmin is gonna be wrong, period, for the first three, four miles. And most people don't think about that and they freak out as a result, or if you're due in New York, potentially the same thing could be happening at certain points in that race. So this is what I tell my runners, is that you shouldn't rely on the GPS of your GPS in your marathon. You are running on a measured course with marked and measured checkpoints every mile. You don't actually need your Garmin to tell you when you've run a mile. The course is going to tell you. So turn off the damn GPS. You can turn off the satellite connection and then lap your watch every mile. You'll know exactly how fast you're running at those points. That does two things. One, it keeps you from being obsessed about your pace at every moment. It allows you to focus and find a rhythm within that mile. And two, it allows you to know exactly where you are on the measured course. Because the other part of the Garmin issue is that because you're not running perfect tangents, you're going to be slightly off. Your watch is going to be slightly off the total distance at the end. And if you're reliant on that to measure you, it's going to be wrong.

Absolutely. And we know this too, Chris, that if you're also, if you're looking up at the clocks that are on the course, those are, they're never right for anybody. You know what I mean? If you see a clock on a course, it is not indicated for you in any way, shape or form. So come on, folks, you don't need the fancy, your watch, even your fancy super Phoenix Garmin has got the capability of going to an old school analog program of click, click, click, click, and you doing the work. And hopefully you practice some of that during your training. It's hard to do that for many of us because we don't have measured marked courses with mile markers at each set location.

But you can go to a track workout. If you do a track workout, learn to lap your watch.

It's super simple. You just hit split.

Instead of worrying about what the Garmin pace says.

Well, here's another one. This one's great for Chicago. I really wanted to get under 330 at Chicago. And they have these awesome Nike Plus Run Club Pacers. I'm gonna just lock and load with them and they'll lead me right to the finish line with time to spare. Famous last words. This one is another rookie one, but even experienced runners, even my team Rogue athletes who I've been coaching for five, six years, I'm still in the process of trying to get them to not count on pace groups. And folks, there's a reason why we don't count on pace groups. It's not because these aren't good people. It's not because these people are inexperienced at what they're doing. Hell, one of my athletes is a Nike run group pace leader and she's a frickin' rock star. She gets it done. She's on pace all the time. The thing is, is that some of these races, they've got a different objective. They've got different pacing that they've got planned. Some of them are uneven splits. Some of them are trying to run the best time for that course. And guess what? The other thing that's really key into this? Human fucking error. People make mistakes. People who are pacers are not used to running the paces that they're running. They're almost all faster than the pace group they're leading and they don't have a facility or an ease at running these paces. Another one of my athletes paced the Austin Marathon for the first time this year. He said it's the hardest thing that he's ever done in his life, was doing the prep and the pacing for it. And he said he did a decent job on the pacing, but that day was a super hot day in Austin, but he lost his pace group, other person in his group. It can be a hot day no matter what happens. You can't count on these people, folks. You did your training. You did all the work. You followed a plan with your coach. You know what you're trying to execute. Don't leave it to some other jack wagon out there who doesn't know exactly what they're doing, who may not have the same plan that you have. People, do not add the element of human error above and beyond your own human error. That is enough to add to the mix.

Yeah, why in the hell would you trust someone you don't know?

Exactly.

To run your race plan. That's me.

For 26.2 miles, for three hours and 30 minutes.

It's crazy. And again, like Steve said, not that these are bad people. Some of them do a great job, but some of them don't and they make mistakes and you don't know them and you don't know what their plan is. Now, that being said, you can use them potentially as reference points on the court to kind of know where you are and to help you dial into your pace, but do not use them as the end all and be all. They will not, as this quote said, lead you to the finish line with time to spare. It won't happen.

Yeah, well Chris, one of my favorite things to do with my athletes that I know that are fit enough to run the goal time that they want is to ask them to run a pace group back, especially in those pace groups that we see at Chicago where we've got these five minute chunks, which we see frequently like three hours, three oh five, three ten, three fifteen, three twenty, three twenty five, three thirty, three thirty five. If you go through the first ten miles with that pace group and they're on an even placed splits, you've got plenty of time to turn around, speed up slowly but surely, start running up and try to chase the next pace group. So, especially those of you who are looking at that at that negative split plan, which many of our first timers or those people who are relatively new to the marathon business, negative splitting is the most assured way of getting what you want, especially if you're pretty solidly comfortable that you're gonna hit the time that you wanna hit. Those of you who are more conservative in your approach and know that you're in, say, 330 shape, but you wanna go out conservatively, run with a 335 pace group and you'll only be, what, a minute and a half down at the most by the halfway mark, depending on how you've adjusted for that, go with them for the first 10 miles, assure that you're in a good spot and then slowly move up the race course.

Trust yourself, not the pacers. All right, I got one. This one's pretty straightforward, or at least on paper it would seem. I skipped my gel at mile 12 because I didn't need it. The funny part is that I laughed, but this isn't really funny, is because I heard this one. This is like not a paraphrased quote. I've literally heard this exact quote from an athlete who was trying to possibly qualify in a race, he ended up a couple minutes shy of that goal because he did just this. He skipped his gel at mile 12 because he didn't need it. And by the way, or he thought he didn't need it, and by the way, this wasn't a rookie. This wasn't a guy running his second, third, fourth or fifth marathon. This was a guy who'd run tens upon 20, like 20-something marathons. He was a veteran, he knew better, and yet he still made this mistake, so.

Famous last words.

Famous last words, we want to reiterate. Hey, once you have a plan, not only from a pacing standpoint, but from a nutrition standpoint, follow it no matter how you feel. I like to tell my athletes to write down their nutrition plan. Write it down, use pen and paper, commit it to memory, write it on your arm if you have to, and then follow it no matter what.

All right, one more, Chris, for me. This is my final one, all right? What the hell? My Garmin reached 26.7 miles and I missed my goal by two minutes. What the hell happened? Folks, and this is a Chicago all the way. This course loops and turns and laughs and writes. Yes, it's flat as a pancake. But folks, you have so many, Chris already articulated part of the problems that we have in Chicago and that the Garmin is off right off the bat by having the tunnel and the numbers of people and the start and finish at a common location. There are hundreds of thousands of people down in that downtown area at that time. The same, similar things happened at Boston, out on Staten Island, I mean out at New York on Staten Island with the ferry and everything else. You can't count on that Garmin to read correctly. Even if in the case of the smaller races like the Twin Cities or Columbus or some of these other races that folks are running, you can't get the tangents right. These courses are measured for the. Elite athletes to ensure that they are in no chance of running 26.5 miles. Oh, sorry, 26.1 miles. They have it guaranteed that they're not gonna run 26.1 miles. They would prefer you to run 26.3 miles than to run 26.1. So, and they've got the chance to close the roads. We've seen this, Chris. We've been part of these race crews. We know sometimes these big races have a line, you can see it in the middle of the race course, painted a certain color, that is the shortest route from place to place. And if you're running at the 315, 320, 330, four hour, 430, five hour pace time, there is absolutely zero percent chance you're gonna be able to run on that tangent line. So you are going to run at least 26.5 miles, in some cases 20. And as the slower runners know this, they're gonna run even further. So you have to take that plan into effect, take that eventuality into your planning, and be sure that you've got yourself a little window of cushion throughout this race to be sure that you can account for that amount of time. Because half a mile, for many of you, is going to be in the vicinity of three, four, five miles. Three, four, five minutes. That's huge, that's a big change in terms of what your goal is. So you need to be prepared, number one, to run the tangents to the best of your ability wherever you're at. A lot of that is, Chris, just looking up, seeing if you can see where the next turn is. Chicago's got some great ways to do this. Some of the other races, of course, they've got ways to do it. You can get your head up, don't look down on the ground. Look up and try to cut off and cut your tangents. Again, it's harder with these bigger races with people in the back. A better plan of attack is to account for it and build in a little window where you know that you're able to account for the fact that you're running further than 26.2 miles.

Okay, we'll end it with this one because I hear this maybe most frequently, especially for those athletes that actually executed their plan and maybe even ran a solid race and had a good time, but they'll say this, they'll say, I just know I could have run faster. I just know I could have run faster. And to me, there's a couple different ways that could manifest. One could be perhaps in plan execution where somebody decides at mile 17 or 18 that, hey, I feel good. I'm gonna pick it up now instead of waiting till the final four miles to close it out. And as a result, they kind of burn their matches too soon. That can happen if you give too much too soon, or if, as Steve alluded earlier, you do too much in the first five miles so you don't have that close at the end. So you can make the mistake and not have what you want at the end by a poorly executed plan. But if you've executed your plan the right way and you've done your work to be in position to get your goal or to maximize your potential at mile 22 to 26 if you're ready for it and you're there in the right time, then it's the mental work that we talked about. We just finished our series on mental training. Episode 40 ended that. If you haven't listened to it, listen to it again and go back in the series and prepare yourself. Do the visualization. Develop the mantras built on your purpose so that when you get to those final three, four miles, maybe even it's the last one or two miles for some of you, you are ready to empty the tank and leave it all out there. There should be no regrets at the end. And if you have regrets, it's perhaps because you haven't done your mental training homework to prepare for those final miles. When we know the monster comes, the ghosts and the zombies will be out.

Yes, they will. For sure. You know, I like to say with this one, Chris, it's an old cliche, day late, dollar short. And athletes get mad at me when I say that, but I'm like, coulda, woulda, shutta, day late, dollar short. Like producer perish, let's see the results. I don't really care about it. Now, that sounds cruel, but what we're trying to do is to say, plan, account, and take full responsibility. It's one of the things we talk about in our mental training tips a couple of times, is that need for you to take full responsibility for the things that happen to you and be ready to have a problem-solving attitude to overcoming them. And again, this just says to folks, if you've got a little window of time over the next couple of weeks as you're preparing for this race and if this race matters to you, take a little time and go back. Maybe listen to our Boston race preview where we talk about some of these things, not quite in the same humorous manner. Go back and listen to maybe some of our mental training plans in terms of ways to set yourself up for success and do a little homework so that you can stand on that starting line having a great experience, knowing you're ready to go, and that you're gonna have the best day you can possibly have regardless of the circumstances.

There are lots of things you cannot control on race day, whether being one we've already talked about, but the effort you can commit and give to the finish line is one of those things you can control. So we urge you to control it and to give everything you have. And we would love to hear stories and examples of marathon experiences from those who may have listened to this and gotten a little nugget they were able to use on their race day. That would be extremely fun and satisfying for us and something we'd love to share on the air. So do please share your success stories based on some tips you've learned from our podcast. If you have them, you can always send them to me at chris at Rogue Running or to Steve directly, stevesissin at roguerunning.com. So there you go. That's our fall marathon kind of preview. You've got what you need to know about Berlin and Chicago, and then you have what you need to know to avoid making the mistakes we've heard so often for your marathon. So with that, we'll wrap this episode as the train kind of rings us out there in the background. So thanks. And of course, as always, you can check us out at roguerunning.com or on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you then.