Hey, everybody, it's episode 61 of the Running Rogue Podcast. This is Chris coming at you from Austin, Texas. Steve is with me. Hey, Steve.

Hello, Podcast World.

We are excited to bring you episode 61. In this case, we have a guest host on, Kevin Leahy, who has been a guest host with us before. He is here to talk about coach-athlete communication, and in particular, he's fascinated by the magic, the artistry of coach-athlete emails. And so he's gonna be diving into that topic with us today, which came to us really because he suggested it. Yeah. And we're sort of like, okay, let's do it, Kevin, because Kevin always, through his Socratic method, always elicits interesting conversations. So he'll be taking us through that. And as a part of it, we've sent him a bunch of our coach-athlete communication so he could kind of prep that way. And then we're just gonna dive in and let him lead us.

We were a little dubious at first, Chris, about whether or not this would be an effective podcast. And those of you who are also looking at the title or thinking about this one and thinking maybe it's not, we promise it's worth it. It's got some good stuff in it.

Take a listen for sure. And so we'll get to that with Kevin in a second. As we always do, we've got some current events and a lot of them to talk about. In this case, we did some predictions on US XC Championships in Tallahassee this past weekend. And Steve and I, we've got to vet ourselves against those predictions. So we'll start on the men's side, Steve, and I have to pat myself on the back.

You gotta have me eat a little crow.

I did nail the top three at least in letter career with the win, Galen Rupp, for second as we both had. But then I was able to nab the third place in Stanley Cabane, who I think with a K to go, he was in sixth or seventh, but he had a massive kick to barely out kick Evan Jagger for third place. And then Evan, the steeplechase world champion medalist finished fourth to narrowly miss the podium. And in this case, we were talking about Rupp and what might be his strategy. And he was one of the aggressors in this one, which was cool to see.

Yeah, I think it really played out kind of the way we thought, you know, we thought a little bit about how that would, whether Rupp was going to just sit and do what he does in the marathon, which is sit around and wait, or if he was going to be an aggressor. And it was good to see him be aggressive. And I could definitely see a little bit more clearly why Alberto wanted that race to be where he went. You know, we're seeing, you know, we saw Shalane running a couple of 3Ks indoors. And it seems pretty obvious that Galen's not really ready to fire with his turnover wheels. So they're definitely going a little bit of a different direction, which is pretty interesting. And it makes me as a coach want to see what they're doing.

Well, and he said afterwards that this was about competing, as we suspected, that it would be about just sticking his nose in it. And so he made the move after 4K to kind of catch Scott Fobble from NAZ Elite, who had kind of broken away a little bit about 4K. Rupp kind of led the move to bridge the gap. And then 8K, Rupp himself tried to go for a long push to the finish. And he was able to basically pop everybody off, except for career, who we knew probably wouldn't be popped. And who came by him fairly convincingly to even get a little celebration before he got the win. So kudos for career because he got the repeat here, but also for Rupp, because I think this shows that not only is he relatively sharp, but he's also, he's got his head in the game as it relates to competing, which is good.

And career, as we have now commented at least 18 times on this podcast, races a lot. So he's sharp, seems to be pretty sharp all the time. So I think that's another thing getting nipped by career, it's the second time that's happened, right? Didn't that happen at the 20K? Is that where they went head to head? Or was that Kip to cheer?

Career has beaten him a few times. I mean, it was the 10K on the track last year. Obviously it was more than just Rupp in that race, but, but-

Didn't they run that 20K? Anyway, it does-

Yeah, maybe the 20K, but anyway-

I think that it's, they're doing different things right now. So Rupp should feel pretty confident that he's-

Yeah, he shouldn't be mad about this at all.

No, not at all.

And Cabenic should be happy again. Scott Simmons' group shows up, puts two on the podium here, and show that, again, they're doing all the right things there in Colorado Springs. On the women's side, we missed it. We had both picked Seidel for the win. Emily Enfeld, who we really shouldn't have doubted, won for her first US Championship. That's just crazy to me, right? I mean-

How are you third in the world?

She's got a world championship bronze, and yet she's never won a US title, but has been in it many times. Probably been a bridesmaid with a second place finish to Molly Huddle many times. And that's really what it comes down to. Huddle has, as we say, death taxes of Molly Huddle. That's the way it's been. And with her not in this event, it opened it up for Enfeld to win. And she did, but it kind of came down to her and Seidel down the finish and Enfeld out kicked her.

But I think we did call this race, Chris, because we both called it, because we said we didn't know exactly where Emily was because she hasn't raced in a bit. And we didn't know where her fitness was. But if she did come in president correct, that we would pick her. So we just didn't have the intel to make that confident a pick. And so we got this, but we got that, we got right what would happen in the race pretty much.

But we didn't get right third place either. Stephanie Bruce snuck on the podium.

We totally got that one wrong. I even did a little bit of a diss. I totally apologize, Stephanie. I'm sure you don't listen to us, but if you do, I definitely feel like one of the things that's been missing from Stephanie Bruce's repertoire is super competitive result in tight, tough races. And she's had some, but she hasn't had them consistently. This was a great performance for her.

Big deal.

Amazing race.

Especially to be Courtney Frerichs, who we know has wheels. And so to have the marathoner come down and show these steeple to up to 5K and 10K athletes, that hey, she can compete is a big deal. Now, this also points to something Ben Rosario has been doing with that group, the Hoka group that trains in Scottsdale with him.

In Flagstaff.

Flagstaff, sorry. They've been doing shorter stuff, you know, they've had Kellyn Taylor run a mile. I think Stephanie had another race on an indoor track somewhere. So they've been kind of working this shorter end of the range, just like Shalane has. And I don't know if that's stealing a page from the book there, or if that's just a part of Ben's program.

But it's a part of our program. It's a part of every program.

So it's good.

It's a part of every Thinking Coaches program to look at where your weaknesses are and work them outside in the zones where and when you can. Because it's just those little things, Chris, especially on the women's side. When we see the level of competition that's now out there at every distance from the eight all the way up to the marathon, I'm going to step out on a limb. But I think in 2020, the US Olympic team, the hardest meet will be the US Olympic trials for women. I think it will be tougher than Kenya and tougher than Ethiopia. That's saying something. I'm standing out on a limb a little bit there. But from the eight on up, I just think we're so good everywhere, especially if Shelby Hulahan and Mario Hall continue to run with what they showed us this weekend, Chris. They are in really good shape.

Well, all of the Bowerman Track Club ladies are on fire. Emily being one of them who led off the weekend with the win. But going back to Stephanie just quickly before we go to those other results, because I do want to get there, is Stephanie is somebody that you can be inspired by, they can root for. She's a marathoner at her core and will definitely be there for the 2020 trials. And if she can convert this result into what it should mean for the marathon for her, she could be in the mix. You know, on the right, on a hot day in Austin, Texas, if that's what it is, right? On a hilly course.

We can hope.

You never know. So anyway, so she's one to watch and she's got two kids, you know, she's a mom of two, but still getting after it. And the thing I appreciate about her is the fact that she's had her ups and downs and has every reason to have retired from the sport, but is still in it and still getting better and still clearly focused to see the fight from her in this race to me is really, really inspiring absent whatever she might do in the future. But anyway, that's my Stephanie Bruce props for the day. So a fun, fun race, though, because you had a 5k, 10k athlete, more of a cross country specialist, a marathoner and a steepler go one through four in that race, which shows you, as you said, why cross country is so beautiful. All right, let's turn to the other meets of the weekend. We had a couple big indoor meets that we haven't really touched a lot on other than individual results, but things are starting to heat up on the indoor side. Before we get to the big meat of the weekend, the Millrose Games, let's talk about the smaller one that you referenced. There was a meet in Boston at BU that had Shelby Houlihan and Mariel Hall, who's new to the Bowerman Track Club. Shelby just absolutely crushed the 3K there, finished with the second fastest 3K ever by an American, second only to Shalane in 8.36, and Mariel wasn't too far behind her to get second there, so they kind of took what Emily did at US Cross and just killed it there in the 3K in Boston. What do you see in that result?

Well, first of all, I see a 431 final mile from Shelby and a sub-6, right at 62nd. Final 400, with a 28.5 final 200, that's just really solid stuff to run that fast. And I know some people will say, well, they should have been in the Millrose race because it would have made the race better, and the Millrose race, which we'll talk about in a second, had a lot of jockeying and positioning and moving and everything else. And this race was set up with great pacers, Sarah Brown, Darren's wife, was one of the pacers for the race. So it was set up by good pacemakers and set up just right with not very much competition. I did notice, Chris, I dug down on the results from that race a little bit further. There was a DNF from an Ethiopian athlete that I've never heard from before, Gudev Teske, who was basically, Marielle outkicked her. So, there were really three women there, but for some reason, it says that the other athlete, the Ethiopian athlete, was DQ'd for cutting into early. But she got the full volume and it gave her time at 8.40, so Marielle just nipped her at the line. So there was a little bit more competition there. That woman's not in the Bowerman group, so she wouldn't have been just deferring. But, anyway, again, as we've been saying, it's hard to believe that women's distance running can get better in the United States, but it just keeps happening, it keeps getting better and better.

You have to believe that Shelby could have gotten the American record had she gone off with a little hotter pace from the beginning.

For sure.

You would think that they might go for that at some point this season.

I think it could be that they're waiting for that. And if they're in Boston, it means they're probably going to stay there. And there's other great meets coming up in Boston.

Boston indoor games coming up.

Yeah, there's a couple of really good races coming in Boston. So it seems like they've done a little bit of a campaign here on the East Coast to get these down. I'm very interested to see what else is going to be playing out for them as the season progresses.

Boadswell for Marielle, too.

Great, great first race for the Bowerman Track Club and a great race for her. She and Shelby have competed against each other since they were in high school. So they know each other very, very well. And I think that it's interesting because I don't see Shelby moving to the 10. I think Shelby will stay at the 5K. And maybe they didn't want Emily and Marielle to go head-to-head for what that might bode later. But who knows? It's interesting when you've got a coach who coaches athletes who race at these same distances at similar caliber, you better hope you've got a great community because they're going to be getting after each other at some point in time.

Well, and you know Jerry has a master plan.

No doubt.

I think Evan Jagger said in his interview after the cross-country meet this weekend, he said, I was as surprised as you guys to hear I was doing this meet, this race.

I love that. I love that.

Coach Jerry said, hey, we're doing this, Evan, because I think it fits and they follow. Now, going to Millrose, which was televised on NBC, thank you, NBC, for at least showing the critical races. Two big miles in this one, the Wanamaker Mile is famous in the indoor track world for being one of the most prestigious miles going. And for this one, you had pretty stacked fields for both races. It was pretty fascinating to watch. I was able to catch it live on NBC as it played out. The women's race went first, and you had Bowerman Track Club again showing up. Colin Quigley got the win and just edged out Kate Grace, who was coming hard. And it was kind of interesting watching it televised because they had the line, the finish line on the track, and then they had a ribbon that they were being a tape that there was held as well. That was about a meter past the true finish line. And so as you were watching it, you were kind of focused on the tape because that's where your eye was drawn to you with two people holding it. And Quigley didn't get to the tape first, Kate did, but she got to the finish line first. So literally, had there been another meter out there, Kate would have nipped her.

And you wonder if Kate wasn't keying on the ribbon and not...

She might have been, but really more than that, Kate had bad tactics in this one. And she admitted that in the post-trace interview. She said, look, I was kind of all over the place. I wasn't comfortable. I was getting used to an indoor track. And this was done at the Armory, which is a famous, old, historic track in New York. And so you could just see the entire time Kate was trying to figure out where to sit versus Colleen just kind of tucked in. And then at the right time, she moved out and went around and took the lead and basically took it with about probably about 600, between 400 and 600 to go. Colleen took the lead and never looked back.

Yeah, it's great to have Colleen back. I mean, she's I think she's there's no doubt she could have been. You could have reversed the roles of Emma and Courtney Freerichs and her in terms of the World Championship result in steeplechase this year. She just has ran into not enough time with her injury and not getting back quite right. And it's great to see her running well and to see her win this race. But let's just keep this a perspective. They didn't run particularly fast. I mean, as I said, Shelby in a 3K ran almost as fast for the final mile.

But it was more tactical than I think they wanted. There was a pacemaker, but nobody went with it.

Yeah. Yeah. Anyway, it's great to see. And Kate will be ready.

She'll be fine, yeah. I mean, Colleen, the cool thing to me about Colleen Quigley, one, that's just a name to remember, because she will be up there with Emma and Courtney when it comes to world steeplechasing if she can stay healthy. And so that's possible that we'll have three American women competing with the best of the world for major medals, which is really exciting. And it'll be exciting, too, to see Colleen push Emma and Courtney at the next US Championships. But the thing to me, I watched her interview before the meet, and she was so loose. She was talking about how she was swimming. Now she's doing about 65 miles a week of running, and she's doing the rest of her volume in the pool. Not aqua jogging, but she's actually swimming laps. And so she was calling herself the running mermaid and kind of just being playful about it. And she's like, that's what I have to do right now to stay healthy. But I was just taken by the looseness with which she approached it, because the way she was talking about the race, she was excited about it. But this is a steeple chaser who hasn't raced a lot recently because of injury. And the fact that she's going in just that loose and just ready to roll just surprised me. For somebody who hasn't raced a lot of indoor miles, had never raced at this meet before, to be that loose after coming off injury, just goes to show you how important that is to good results as being relaxed and loose.

Absolutely.

And she was able to get there and I don't know how, but it was just really impressive to me. The other thing that was interesting to me from this is Kate Grace talked about in her pre-race interview how it's been a definite adjustment going to the Bowerman Track Club because...

They work hard.

She didn't say this, but I'm reading between the lines, which is that she was probably the big dog with Kim Conley in Sacramento with Drew Whartenberg. And probably most of the time, depending on what they were doing, was leader of that group. You know, Kim doesn't have the wheels that Kate has. So if they were doing short and fast work, Kate was probably at the front. And she was talking about how they did a fart leg with Shalane and she got broken. She popped off the back. She tried to hang with the big dog, Shalane, and it didn't work. So she was clearly humbled by the group, but also excited about what that meant for her being pushed to a new level. So that was cool to see. But yeah, she'll figure it out. She's going to be fine.

So one comment on Colleen's. I read also that Kate said something to the effect of, don't be surprised if Colleen runs shorter distance races because she's got some serious wheels, which she showed in that race. But one of the reasons Colleen's also probably pretty calm, cool, and collected is many people who see her will recognize her as a stunning beauty. But she was also a runway model for a while, where she literally decided against probably a more lucrative career as a model. She could have made more money than she makes as a runner now. Although if she won an Olympic gold medal, that would probably flip. But anyway, she probably has a little more comfort in being on stages and sees a balance with things that maybe others don't so much. But regardless, Jesus Christ, the Bowerman Track Club is just moving, motoring.

Killing it. No one else is really even close at this point. But we're still deep. A lot of these other groups are still impressive. It's just the Bowerman Track Club is just killing it.

Well, Emma and we're going to talk about this in a second, but Emma and her training partner Aisha Pratt, they ran 8.41, which wasn't that too much slower. And the story of that day was Carissa Schwitzer breaking the collegiate record. Jenny Simpson's former... Jenny was named before she was Simpson? I'm already forgetting.

Behringer.

Behringer. So that's a name to be looking for too as well. That girl is just on fire, running incredibly well. A collegiate record, taking it from Jenny and from I think the next best performance was Sally Capiego. I mean, those were women who were world beaters at the time that they ran those times in college. And so this is... She's a real talent and showing how deep American distance running is.

So before we go there, let's talk men's want to make her mile. The men's race played out very differently in that it doddled even more, as you might expect, than the women's race. And then Chris O'Hare got sick of it. UK, Scottish born athlete. And he just took it with at least 600 to go, maybe slightly longer than that, opened up a 20 meter gap. And then, you know, in those situations in a mile, typically those people get caught because it's hard to lead on your own. And if you make that kind of a move, usually you're using too much energy. But he did it, made the definitive move, and they started to reel him in, and Ben Blankenship almost got there. But he held him off in a really, really impressive finish.

Yeah, I was surprised that Blankenship let him go. You know, I mean, obviously it was a critical misstep, but he probably thought he could pull him back in.

I think he was also in a spot where he couldn't respond right away. So he didn't have a choice, in other words. And so if he was going to respond, it would have taken even more energy. I just think he was slightly in the wrong spot. But you look at Robbie Andrews and Kyle Murber. Nick Willis. Nick Willis, who apparently had the flu that week, so I kind of gave him a little bit of a pass. I just couldn't believe they let him go. Because he was one of the favorites going in, and he had said he wanted a fast race and was actually disputing the pace that they had originally asked for from the pacemaker. So it's odd to me that they let him go, but they did, and he held on, and he kept looking back in that last lap to see where they were, which usually is a sign that there's trouble, which there was, but he still held him off and got an impressive win for Chris O'Hare.

Yeah, it's pretty sweet. It's great to see Chris still keep plugging away, and Chris is a super talented athlete. He won the NCAA Championships, his junior year, and then he choked his senior year, and he ran for Tulsa. But this is a guy who's a real talent, and even though he's a palmy from across the pond, I still cheer for him because he's a great guy, and he wins the right way. I'd love to see a gutsy runner get rewarded.

Yes, so let's talk about that 3K at. Millrose with Aisha and Emma going 1-2. Aisha trains with Emma now, but hasn't beaten Emma very much. They recently ran a mile in Colorado at 7, 500 feet and both had amazing results, but Aisha was second to Emma in that one. In this case, she made the move at the end to try to take it, and Emma started a wheeler in but just couldn't quite get there in that closing stretch. What do you think this means for their dynamic as training partners?

Well, I think it helps both of them. I mean, I think now they probably had a master and servant roles that Aisha, and many people thought when Aisha went there that the roles were going to be, she was just going to be a training buddy and a whipping girl, and it seems that that is not the case, as is shown here. Number one, the way that race played out, there was no deferring to Emma. The other thing is, as good a technician and as strong and as tough as Emma is, if you'd have asked me five years ago which of the two of them would be the better steeplechaser on the world level at this point, I would have said Aisha. Emma Coburn just knows how to find a finish line and she knows how to run the steeple really, really well, but she's not a better steeplechaser than Aisha is. It's not really that surprising because Aisha is probably a better flat runner than Emma is. Number one, I think Emma is getting better and better and better and better. To run this time for Emma is very fast for her. It is a really big deal, but it's really great to see Aisha come into her own and get a big win on a big stage and beat some other really pretty talented athletes that were in that field. I mean, it's no joke. That was a serious race. It would have been great to see all those ladies all combined in one race, but then it would have been untenable and it would have seen a race that wouldn't have been as good.

It would have been different. It would have played out differently, but it bodes well. It's too bad Aisha is a Jamaican athlete because it would be fun to have her in the mix in the US.

Actually, it isn't because I'm a fan of Aisha, so when we get to the World Champs, you get to see her and she gets to be on the line. She gets to be in the mix. If you've ever talked to Aisha, she's a really wonderful human being and somebody who is doing this for the right reasons and absolutely loves the sport and probably is still pinching herself to believe that she's in the position that she is because she came from less than optimal. Everybody knew Emma was going to be pretty good when they saw her in high school, and people didn't necessarily say that about Aisha. She made it herself, so it's great to see.

Her name is now hyphenated, Aisha Pratt Lear, as she married Will Lear, who ran terrible in The Way I Make Her Mile, by the way.

I don't even know why he's still doing it.

But that's a different story. But Aisha is someone on the World Steeple stage who hasn't had a breakthrough there, but might, especially as she comes along with Emma in training. So that's a name to watch that you can root for wearing Jamaican vests in these World Meets. So I think that covers it. Anything else from The Weeknd, Steve, that we should talk about?

I don't think so. Just that Shadrach Kipchichir won again, raced again and won again. Yes, another Scott Simmons athlete racing again and winning again.

It's crazy.

Yeah, it is crazy. I don't know when the wheels are going to come off that group, but who knows? I did toss out an email to Scott to see if he would come on the podcast to see if we could get him. But I've got no response, but I don't think he's the kind of guy to respond.

Scott Simmons, if you're listening, we'd love to have you on.

Yes, we would love to.

But I doubt he's listening.

But anyway.

Okay, now we turn to our discussion hosted by Kevin Leahy. He's been, as we mentioned on our podcast before, episode 33 where we talked about the alchemy of running, science versus magic, fascinating episodes. So definitely go back and check that one out. As we've discussed before, Kevin is the husband of one of our Rogue athletes. He's not a runner himself unless someone's chasing him or he stole something. But he's fascinated by the Rogue community and a participant in it, especially in terms of the social elements when there's beer involved. So Kevin's going to be our host of sorts, and Steve and I are going to sit back and kind of be the subjects for once. And we're going to talk about, as we mentioned at the top, kind of coach-athlete communication and specifically written communication. So Kevin, I'm going to turn it over to you. Where do you want to start?

I just want to say hello, everyone. Thanks for inviting me, y'all. This is always a fascinating opportunity. I see it as a world of coaching and a unique world of coaching in the space of running. And I'm fascinated by what Rogue has been able to accomplish. This is another one of those really insightful moments for me a non-runner. So I just want to let everyone know out there that when I thought up the idea of maybe looking deeper into these emails and how you create them and what are they for, and these are the emails that go to the group of runners y'all both are coaching, I asked for some examples. And so I want to kind of kick this off by saying I had no idea what y'all were writing in those emails. So I give that to the listener that this is a non-runner that needed a lot of guidance. And so I'd like to share some of my non-knowledge with y'all by way of questions. And hopefully these coaches will elicit some key answers. So y'all, if you're listening and you're a runner in a group, you probably have gotten at least one or two emails. And if you're in the groups of these fellas, then you've gotten a lot of emails. I've seen several of them. So my first question to both of you, and I guess I'll start with you, Chris. And if we can just kind of toggle back and forth, I'll try to invite you to let the other guy give a go. But Chris, why read your particular emails? If I'm in your runner group, why am I reading your email? What's your thought?

So, well, first of all, just for context, for people who aren't in my group, I do send typically two emails a week, both very different in terms of their purpose. The first I send on a Tuesday before our Wednesday workout that basically just has the details of what they're doing during our quality work on Wednesday. It's typically a shorter, more brass-tack sort of email of here's what to expect tomorrow during the workout, here's what I expect of you. So that comes on Tuesday. Then on Thursday, sometimes Friday, depending on the week, I send a longer email that explains what they're doing on Saturday for their long run, but also gives a lot more content, typically some training tips, some reminders from me as their coach. I might comment on some events that are coming up that I recommend for them. And also I send every week an inspirational note of some sort, linking to a quote, an article, a blog, something I think might uplift them in some way. So that comes, my longer email is sort of a Thursday email. And so there's reasons, my reasons are different for the two. One, the first one on Tuesday is more just about conveying information. People need to know what to do when they show up.

And so why read is to just know what you're up to?

Know what you're up to. And sometimes there's nuance there. We might have a particularly tough workout, and I want to make sure that they're mentally stealing themselves for that workout. And we can talk about some of the games I play or we play with that. You know, sometimes you're playing a little bit of a psychological game, and game may not be the right word, but you're trying to achieve a certain psychological outcome to prepare them mentally for the workout the next day.

Do you think you're conveying that? And I know Steve wants to chime in, but real quick, on the psychological game, do you think they're acknowledging that when they're reading, or are they unaware that that's kind of part of the game?

Games are all work, because I'm not trying to trick them in any way.

He's lying to them.

I typically don't lie. But it's usually just... I may be trying to achieve a certain psychological outcome.

Okay.

And I think usually that's a pretty straightforward thing, but it's not always.

To make sure, that's more like why you're writing. But I'm focusing on why you're reading. So the first... The main structure of what you're doing is on a...

So why should people read? To get that information, one. And then on the second piece...

The second email on Thursday.

The second email, which is more... Has more information, it's... I think in order to fully get what you want out of my program as a coach, you need to read that email. Because it conveys things you can't get by just executing a workout.

So there's an access factor for you that these emails are helping you accomplish.

Access and understanding, trying to build their wisdom as athletes.

Okay, that's great. And what about you, Chris? I mean, Steve?

It's all good.

I'm on Steve now. What about why read your emails?

Because, okay, since Chris gave a little context of how he sent his emails, I send an email whenever I feel like it.

No joke.

Sometimes it has a week's worth of workouts. Sometimes it will have four weeks worth of workouts. But you read my email because you want to know the specifics of the workout that you do. Chris and I both write what we call a macro cycle, which is a bigger picture of the entire year that then needs some dialing in and some specifics. And so I make sure that the athlete who does read it is prepared for the workout that they want to run and to execute the workout the way that we want. That's why my athlete should read my email.

You bet. So I'm hearing from both, and I hear you leaning in, Chris. So preparation for sure is a big key for why I read these things. You want to be prepared for what you're up to. And then Steve, you have also, and I noticed this in some of your emails, you have even documents you share with them. You have sort of a mid-range or a longer range, and then there's always the real short range, what we're about to do. Is that fair?

Yeah, so there's a big picture. There's, well, occasionally I do talk about what Chris is saying in his third, in his second weekend, his second email of the week, in that I would call it intel and inspiration, and that's what I do that occasionally. But mostly that's because I woke up that morning on the right or the wrong side of the bed, and I decided that this particular group of people needed to hear from me about this particular issue. Occasionally they, I feel what they need to read is the information I'm telling them, but I always am coming first from the point of view of X's and O's and not inspiration.

But again, that might be why you write, which I'm about to get into. I keep slipping into that. That's all good, but it's why they read, because I'm really curious. Chris, did you have some comments before I pop another question?

I guess as I reflect on what I said before, ultimately, we're both trying to build mastery at some level with our athletes. And in order to become a master craftsman as a runner, then you have to understand why. And you have to understand some of the technical elements that go into what I tell them. And so if you don't read that information, it's fine. You can still execute a program. You can still probably have a good race. But I don't think you're going to get as much out of a program with me unless you read and internalize that information and then learn from it over time as you sort of experiment with the application. Because when people are new, just like you said as an honor, this is great to me. I'm sure when new people join my group, they're like, oh my gosh, I don't understand some of these words he's using. But as they read and understand and then apply and then maybe see me follow up on that point again later, they're going to get more and more as they go. And I have people that have trained with me for seven years that are master craftsmen of sorts. And I've built that in them through that mode of communication.

Yeah, I heard it said. And to be fair, it's probably begging a second podcast just to hear from readers that do have something to say about why they're reading. Because y'all are writing these things. It's presumptive to think you know why.

You asked the question, though, Kevin.

My question to both of you is what percentage do you think and what percentage of your respective groups do you think are reading these things? Like, I mean, thoroughly reading them.

Well, I think that about, you know, 60 to 80 percent of the people that I send the email out to who are actively engaged in the running process at that point, because that's a lot of categories. That's another caveat, just because sometimes people are not in a main training phase, and no one's reading my email for some of the things that they're reading Chris's for. Right? So I'm much more X's and O's than Chris is. So if somebody's not in the...

When you say X's and O's, what do you mean?

Where we're meeting for the workout, what time we're meeting for the workout, what the workout actually is, what those paces that I want them to run it is, and very occasionally I'll even tell them what they might feel. But I really try to...

What's the play?

Yeah, what's the play?

He's calling plays.

I'm calling plays, and then I like to wait.

I don't...

you know, honestly, Kevin...

X's and O's is a football metaphor.

I distrust the e-mail. I just distrust it generally to begin with, and I know that most of the magic that I create happens on the course.

Oh, sends it out early. Distrust of the e-mail that he sends anyway.

So, yeah, well, I have to send it because my people want to read it. That's why I may be wrong, but I believe that this large... I think this large number percentage of people read it because they want to know where to go.

All right.

And if I don't send it, they lose their shit.

That makes the question to Chris. Chris, do you distrust the e-mail you send? This is news.

Look, Steve's an orator, right? That's his strength. You connect to Steve by his energy, and that's how he conveys things.

E-mails can't convey energy?

They can, but not as well. And so I think that's where his distrust comes from.

But you, do you distrust the e-mail as a vehicle?

No, I take it for what it is. Well, one, I'm a visual person who understands communicating or understanding myself through written word. So it kind of is in my wheelhouse because it's my personal preference. But more than that, I don't actually care whether people read my e-mails or not. I'm truly agnostic to whether or not people read my e-mails. I think people think I care, and so they always feel apologetic or they're apologetic or feel guilty when they tell me, oh, I didn't read that. I'm like, I actually could care less.

You didn't write it for you to read it.

I didn't write it.

You wrote it for other reasons.

Well, I wrote it because I know there will be some people that need it communicated that way, and there's others that don't, and that's okay. So for me, I think 15% of the people in my group read my whole e-mail.

You may be speaking more of your Thursday e-mail than your Tuesday e-mail.

Yeah, Tuesday is probably a little higher because there's more technical info.

Because I think, in fairness to Steve, both of your Tuesday and Steve's e-mails, many of them that I saw, these X and O's you're talking about, what's the play? I mean, it would be a little bit rough for one of the group members not to read those, show up at the wrong place at the wrong time, and run the wrong course. I mean, that would be terrible.

Well, but I think Steve's overestimating.

I very well may be.

I think he is, because ultimately...

Speaks as somebody in the group.

When it comes to X and O's, play calling, workout details, we both communicate that multiple times, right? We're doing it in an email before. We're doing it that morning...

On a whiteboard.

Before they go out on the whiteboard. And then oftentimes we're doing it once we get to our destination again.

Repetition being the mother of learning?

Yeah, and you just, whatever. Some people hear things differently, so I know some people might not read the email, but would read the whiteboard or whatever.

So what percentage are reading yours?

Tuesday email, I'd put it at 50.

Alright.

Thursday email, I'd put it at 15% with the caveat that that's the whole thing. I'd intentionally outline or number and kind of bullet point that Thursday message so that people could skim it for what they're interested in and then dive into a section if they want to. So I think 15% of the reading the whole thing, I think the rest are either picking out pieces or not reading it at all. And that's fine. I honestly don't care.

It may be fine, but now I want to challenge both of you. I'll start with Steve, but let's just presume that you become very wealthy each extra reader you get of your email. I'm giving you a demand for getting more readership. Help the listener understand why the read should happen, why 100% is absolutely the right number.

Steve?

Because they're not getting the full value of their experience if they're not prepping in advance. And the relatively few times that I do put more color in my emails, they're really, really fucking good. So they're missing something.

Distrust in the presence of excellence.

I distrust the ability for the people that read it, the people that will be ready to take in the information that I send them. So I don't look at it as a format that I really count on.

Alright, I got two words out of you. Preparation and value. What else you got? Like, why do you want... What's compelling the reader not reading right now to read?

Honestly, I don't think that there's much more. I think that that's enough.

In particular, for your form of email.

But now, if I can extrapolate just a little bit, I'm now seeing the incredible value that Chris' athletes are getting out of his Thursday email. And that is not something I'm going to do anytime soon. So Team Rogue don't expect that to change. But I do see that there's a body of work there and an ongoing, as Chris said, a sort of boot camp or an apprenticeship that he's working on to get those athletes to really believe that this is a path with heart.

Yeah, he referred to mastery. Do you think your emails over time aid in that?

I don't think so. I don't think that that's where I go with the email format.

But there is a value, part of the value from Steve, your emails, and then I want to ask you, Chris, the same question, but it seems to me to be this, the details with which you provide the play, that speaks to years of work on those details. Can you speak a little bit about, to the reader, like reader, here's what you're reading when you see this.

Yeah, so you're asking me to delineate sort of what it is that it says. So my email basically will start with some introductory statements in general, but very little of that. In fact, if I could get away with it most of the time, I'll just start. The first line is Tuesday, February blank, 2018. Meet at Rogue, 5.30 a.m. The workout as it is, so let's say two times 400, two times 800, one times 1600, two times 800, one times two times 400, so a ladder.

That's the play.

That's the play. Paces at these paces, which is another part of the play, and then it will say what the recovery or the recuperation is. And then it will go Thursday, what we do, and then it will be Saturday, what we do.

Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's a good example. And we're going to talk about why you write that, but I want to hear from you, last voice from you, and then I want to hear from Chris. Why does the reader that's not reading that want to just, why is there a compelling need to read what you just talked about is in your emails?

Because my workouts are really hard, and they're a little complicated sometimes. And to be effective at training, it's best to go in as loosey-goosey as I am, and as much as I love to have people act in the moment and be free, they need some guidance before they walk into that to get the most out of that session.

So there's a sense that this email gives instruction that is preferably done exactly as it's described.

Correct. When I coached at the University of Texas, the women at the University of Texas, they got no email from me. They showed up to that day, and they got the work. That was it. And I might foreshadow a little bit, but they didn't know what was going on. When I coached my post-collegiate athletes, I used a little bit of both. And Team Rogue, the group that I coached, it is purely an information device for me at that point.

So I'm going to ask you to think anything else when we talk to Chris, because I know Chris has a little bit of a different approach. I'd like to hear, Chris, I'm going to say to you that I think for every extra reader you get than the 15% on the Thursdays, I'm going to give you an extra 500 bucks. So you're going to make a lot of money if you can get to 100%. And actually, you want the money. So what do you think is the most compelling reasons for the non-reader to start really devoting that attention?

Well, I've got a few things to say here, because, and I'm not going to answer the question directly yet, which is more like a Steve thing to do, but here we are. First of all, I read Steve's email because I'm an athlete in his group. And so I want to start to answer this question from the perspective of an athlete reading his email, which is that typically I'll read his email in four line blocks as we go, right? So if I'm in hardcore training mode, it's like search Don Patrol on my inbox. Steve's email pops up, click into it, and look at the workout that we have for that week, that day, whatever, just to see what it is. Typically, I'll do that again one or two times, sometimes more, before a workout. And part of it is nervous tick, maybe, just like, is it still the same? Was that as hard as it looked the first time?

You're speaking about the need for confirmation.

Do I remember what the rest was? What's the pace on that interval? I'll go back to confirm and also to basically prepare my mind for what's to come in that workout. I think that's a big part of it as a reader, is using it as a mental preparation tool to prepare your mind for the workout. So you get the most out of the workout and also so you're not sitting there asking, hey Steve, what's the rest? You're focused on the task at hand when you show up.

Yeah, it's a really interesting point about the use of energy in the run. I'm well apprised of the need for maximum energy on these long runs. That's a really good point that mental energy is an energy expense. These emails can reduce that uncertainty, which is actually an energy drain from a brain perspective. Awesome. That was a really good point. Thank you for that input.

So that's one thing.

But this question at hand is...

As it relates to me and earning more money...

This is again to connect the listener. This is how to grab... It was compelling to me when I heard that people aren't reading these emails, I found it kind of odd, so I wanted to know. So obviously the listeners that are reading the emails, awesome because you're getting the value, but I get the listeners that's like, yeah, but come on, I got a lot of stuff to do, etc. So help them understand from the perspective of how you prepare emails and why and all that. Why read these things?

Well, I'll save my other digression, but brass tacks of it is they're paying me to coach them. So why wouldn't they consume what they're paying for?

Well, they don't understand the value.

What they're part of what they're paying for is the information I convey on those Thursday emails. And I think that they're not consuming it, and my assumptions may be wrong here, but my thought in those that don't consume it is either that they don't want it as much as somebody else, or maybe they don't consume information well through visual means.

And those are both fair. I mean, you can't knock somebody who either just isn't that interested or somebody who just can't get the value. It's not that they don't want it.

And so for the former, the person who can get value from it but is choosing not to, then the question becomes, well, how bad do you want whatever you're paying me to give, which at the simplest level is help them achieve a goal, right? And so why would you throw away your own money relative to gathering resources that are right in front of you in order to achieve a goal that you say you want?

And I think that's super compelling. I mean, you know, as a coach myself and I do more executive stuff, I would say that it's very common that people know what they need to do, but they just don't do it because the drive isn't there. So I think it's interesting for a listener to think about what you just said, that it turns out it's your decision. And in particular, with these group emails, you don't know who's reading them or not.

Well, you know, Kevin, you said if I could get paid X amount of dollars more if they read it, I could tell you what would happen, though. I would start changing the workouts from what I wrote on the email enough to make them start reading them. So I very rarely change my workouts. I used to change them all the time. Chris can attest to this. I've been coaching you for how long? Like seven years or something, six or seven years? And I used to be terrible. Like whatever workout was on Tuesday, I would change my mind. I'd move it to Thursday. I'd do something else.

Chris is laughing, by the way.

It's all true.

I don't know why I did that. I think it was a lot of that feeling of trying to get the experience that the UT girls had when I coached them was that they did so. It just created a different training environment. And now I feel like that's why I write it, so that my athlete, as Chris said, so my athlete is prepared and that they're getting the most for what they're doing and so that they're not stressed and they're coming in and it's calm and cool and it's collected as possible. Now, I do occasionally change the workout anyway, occasionally, but most of that is because I knew in advance I wanted to elicit the different change. As Chris said, you used the term game, but you don't really mean... It's more just making sure that they're coming and showing up and being ready for some unusual thing to happen because that's what happens on race day is it not going to script, not going the way you think it's going to go, and you want them to have an opportunity to have practiced all the different scenarios that might be challenging for them.

And let's go because that starts to be why you write and I love it, but Chris, do you have more comments about why they read?

Well, I just want to clarify that I don't know that it should matter to me.

Oh, you made that clear.

If they're reading or not, yeah.

You indicated, rightfully so, you're agnostic. You may or may not care. I mean, obviously, a part of you, there has to be as a human. You know, there's some desire. No one would just keep on babbling if nobody was reading.

I don't know. Not that Chris is a babbler. Not that Chris is a babbler, but Chris is really good at deciding what he thinks needs to be done and doing it anyway, no matter what, to be sure that they got it. That is admirable. No, it is. It truly is. It's one of those things. Like, if people weren't reading my email and I knew they weren't, I would not write it. There is no way that I would look at it and say, this is doing what it... If it's not getting... Eliciting the response I want, it wouldn't be happening.

Because this is a great segue, because, guys, it was very clear to me as a novice, and I've got to speak on behalf of the audience of readers of your emails, the time, energy, effort, heart that you put into these emails is crazy. It's nutso. And I can... I know this, and I'm not even running the... And I know this because the amount of content... And see, viewers are in particularly precise clarity, because the content is in, like, four lines. But it's years of development, et cetera. And I even asked you, like, is it guesswork? It was kind of a game to even suggest it's guessing. I knew the answer wasn't, but I want to make sure. So why don't we get into this? And Steve, why don't you start off with, why are you writing, particularly because you've already demonstrated distrust in this vehicle, and you've demonstrated that you wouldn't do it at all if you didn't have readers. So why write these things?

I write them because I feel like they are... In two reasons. Number one, because I want my... The altruistic reason is because I want my athletes to know what they have coming up and so they can be adequately prepared. It's exactly... I write it for the exact same reasons that I want them to read it, right? But there's another piece which is a little more selfish, and it's that this is what good coaches do. This is how coaches make their scratch. And I would be... I would love to read other coaches' emails. I have the benefit of reading occasionally, getting to read a wide variety of Rogue coaches' emails because I'll ask them to send them to me occasionally and I'll get some feedback. But I would love to read Jerry Schumacher's emails to his athletes or another... or Joe V. Hill's or somebody. Not all of them, probably, write them, but just looking at that, I would love to... I would be able to tell a lot of information as a coach looking at other coaches' stuff. So it's kind of like... I feel like it's like what we do. It's become what we do as a coach. And honestly, I'm not sure that... I also write it for one other reason, which is I don't think I'd be as good a coach if I didn't write it down because I'm not as organized and as detail-oriented as Chris is. And I write a macro cycle well in advance. That's the big picture for six months, way in advance. And I can't remember what the next workout is going to be. And I won't go back to that document. I have a real aversion to going back and looking at things that I've done. And so I want to be sure that I'm being the best coach I can and that I'm being consistent and that I'm seeing execution in a way... I'm a way better coach now than I was seven years ago because of emails, honestly. And that's another reason why I write it is I'm holding my own self-accountable to the kind of work I want my athletes to do and the standard I hold myself to.

And so you believe to kind of... And note that you believe that these emails do make your runners better.

No, I truly, truly believe they do, which is another compelling reason why they should read it.

Fantastic. Yeah, yeah. And Chris, what about you? Why are you writing these things?

So I mentioned the idea of conveying mastery and wisdom so I won't belabor that point. But for me, it's become a part of the culture of my group. It's consistency. It's just like we have workouts on Wednesdays and long runs on Saturdays. You get emails from me on Tuesday and Thursday. And as I mentioned, I think, offhand, before we came on, you know, Google held my Tuesday email in the ether one day.

Well, explain this a little bit. So let me ask the question. Has there ever been a time where you prepared an email, you thought you sent the email, and it didn't go out?

Yeah, that has happened. And in this case, it actually went out, but Google thought it was spam, and so they just held it.

In the interwebs?

In the interwebs. And I didn't know that it hadn't been delivered. They hadn't messaged, or Google hadn't given me a kickback on that. And my people were too afraid to ask until somebody finally did that evening. Where's the email? Or I didn't get it. And so I resent it, and they held it again in the ether. And so it wasn't until the next morning on Wednesday I came in, and everybody was...

Hold the phone, though.

Everybody was scared to even mention it.

What's this too afraid? I need to know more about that.

No, they were like... It's like somebody sheepishly came up. It's like, did you send the email?

But like, why would there be fear involved?

Is that the right emotion? All coaches, in one way or another, use fear and manipulation to get what they need to get done.

They thought I was trying to achieve something. They thought it was some thing that I was trying to achieve by not sending it, some test.

There were some games, so they didn't want to like out the game.

Yeah, exactly.

I can't wait to use that one as an excuse for why my emails don't go out.

And in this case, I just didn't know. Confess it.

I meant to say that.

But as a result, like literally the whole energy of the group was different that morning because the cadence of that communication was off. And to me, consistency in training is so important. We preach that all the time. Are you running consistently from day to day, week to week, month to month, year to year? That's how you achieve outcomes in running. And I think the email is a part of the cadence of consistency that has become a part of the culture of my group that sets the tone.

That's awesome. So what, I mean, this is kind of probably more for Steve. Some listeners may want to know, like, why did you write the first email? Like, when and why and, like, was there benefit? Did you just have the need?

Yeah, so when we first started Rogue, we paid money for a pretty robust backend for the time that we had. We spent a lot of money on our website, and we utilized the website's interface and a forum to disseminate all the information that we needed to. This was in the early aughts, which it was pretty unusual to have that level of service. But the Internet was coming into its own, and we thought it was a great way for us to do things. And we found over the two to three years, over two or three years, maybe even three to four years, that people weren't reading it. And people weren't going to the site, and they weren't looking at it. And they were coming to workouts unprepared and maybe not even showing up. You know, we ran not from our own physical location. We ran from one physical location, but we frequently changed where we met. And so people would not know. They'd go to the wrong place, and we felt like we were responsible for that, even though honestly we weren't. But people thought so, and you know, customers always write in that regard. So I started writing the emails because I knew a missive from me would be read by them. This was before everybody got fully and completely and utterly inundated by email. And so it was still a little bit novel. It was almost kind of a little bit like writing a letter. And you got a letter from your coach, and they delineated specifics about what was going on. And my emails at that time were probably much longer and more along the lines of the way Chris's are. In fact, most of the curriculum that we ended up writing for training our coaches came from those emails that I wrote because it had the real nitty gritty to it.

Do you believe, and then I want to ask Chris, but do you believe, Steve, that your emails changed the content and form change due to the runner population that you started? You know, you have continued to coach a different set of runners.

Yeah, so my content has changed primarily because I'm coaching a more advanced level athlete that understands the terminology that you didn't understand when you were reading it. But some of them still don't. They still don't know when I write a little m, the little difference between a little m and a big M. A little m is for meters. A big M is for miles. And I don't know how I came to that parlance. I'm not sure if it's...

It's kind of a big difference.

It's a huge difference.

It's kind of a big difference.

It's a huge difference. So, you know, I think most of it is mine are so terse and so specific because I've been coaching them for a good long period of time.

And they kind of have a good...

And they're a little bit more of an advanced level runner, at least an advanced knowledge based runner.

So I do want to ask the same question to you, Chris, unless you want to riff on that. But the question would be like, why did you start using the vehicle of email and what have you seen over your trend over time?

Man, that makes me think back. Well, to me, email has always been a primary way of communicating with my group. I don't remember not having it. There's always been...

We jettisoned the website for that by the time you started, really, hadn't we?

Well, no, I mean, I was using the site all the way until we killed it, basically. I was one of the few...

And I never used it anymore.

I was one of the few holdouts that actually used the site.

I'm not quite dead yet.

Because, yeah, it would send email. You would basically enter the information in the site, and then it would disseminate it to the addresses versus putting it into Gmail or something. But anyway, so I was a holdout, and I don't remember ever not doing it. And I think a lot of that comes from the fact that I'm a visual learner person. I just read myself, so it's a natural way to communicate as well. In terms of how it's evolved, I think my Thursday content has definitely evolved through the years.

Why did you decide to start writing that Thursday, which of course is different than the Tuesday night, which is more into kind of the community and the spirit of the sport, I guess.

Right. I mean, it was just about that. It was about trying to convey the things I couldn't convey on a Wednesday because I only see them for a short window, and it's 5.30 in the morning, and people are half awake anyway when they walk in. So there was a time actually, now that I'm talking about it, where I would give more information on Wednesday before we started. So I might spend 10 or 15 minutes explaining some things, some key points, before we left to go, which became a problem for multiple reasons. One, because people couldn't pay attention at that hour. They were barely awake.

It's a terrible time for people to take in information.

And secondly, because it was, most people from my group have to go to work or get to their life.

Oh, that.

Or take a kid to school.

I thought from these emails, running was your job.

Yeah, they don't have the time for me to sit there and do 15 minutes of riffing on a topic before they got to get to work and get their workout done and get to their life. So I realized that that was a bad forum for a variety of reasons and that I needed another way to communicate. So the visual email kind of became a way to convey some of that information I was saying on Wednesday.

So that's really important for listeners. I would think that in some of your coaches, for sure you, Chris, like you're choosing to use that as a place to share information you think will increase aptitude, wisdom, mastery that they're not going to get elsewhere.

Right.

Well, that starts to lead to another thing. And I think, Steve, you probably appropriately can kick off this. Like, what are you not writing in the emails? What should the listener realize, you know, I need to... I deserve to follow up, to get my value prop. I need to keep going. I think your runners know this, but I'm just curious for listeners that aren't coached by you, et cetera.

Well, I truly believe that... I want every one of my athletes to do the workout the way I write it, because it's the most effective way to do the workout, and I truly do want them to do that. But I know that for any of a wide variety of given reasons, a person might not be able to execute the workout the way it was written. And as Chris knows, that's probably where most of the real meat of coaching happens. I would venture to guess he would say the same thing that he knows that he's going to throw something up against a wall. It will stick or not. But for those it doesn't stick for, there comes the coaching opportunity to give the athlete insights to why it didn't work or...

I kind of want to challenge you though, Steve, because you are such a proponent of Rogue as Community, the church of the long run. There is this need for the vehicle of email to be part of the community, but your emails aren't really needing to do that. I think is that a special nature of your groups that you are emailing to? Are they already in Community?

They are in Community, but honestly, I think that what Rogue does generally and what Team Rogue does is different. I truly feel like my group is... they are paying for a result. Rogue in general, the other groups that are coached by Rogue, they are paying for runs, and some are paying for community.

Kind of a pop quiz. Do you think your running group benefits from Community or not?

Yes, everybody benefits from Community, but that's not supposed to happen. That's a residual benefit that happens on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.

Do you think an email could provide more of that Community benefit?

No, they have to get it from me. I mean, I'm sorry. That's the ego part that I probably do have, is that I do know better than most of my athletes about what's going on with them, even when they think they're in control. And that's not because I'm all seeing omniscient. It's because they're in their body experiencing a certain thing, and then the workout goes well or goes awry. And then the moment, then those opportunities are there as a coach to take advantage of those good and bad things to help get better results and to train. Chris and I say this on this podcast all the time. It's counterintuitive for humans to do, but in running, you should fail, because failing means you're gaining aptitude and you're getting better at it.

But the emails aren't the vehicle for fail, or do you think sometimes they are?

No, I don't think that. Again, I'm not... My athlete would fail if they didn't get the email. I'm not sure if that's where you're going with it.

Actually, part of the question is some of those routines, some of the plays look pretty complicated and hard, and you played a little bit of a reference to a game before. Do you all ever write a run, prepare for an email description of a run, knowing this thing is complicated and it might really stretch and challenge in the way we need to to kind of get to that race day performance?

I write workouts I don't think my athletes will complete occasionally. Don't do it very often, but I'm very unusual in that regard. I don't think that there's many coaches that have that in their playbook.

And the purpose for that is?

It provides... Most people are capable of way more than they know. And I'm honestly surprised by my team Rogue Group. They pretty consistently step up to something I wasn't sure that they could do.

What about you, Chris, on that same kind of frame? Do you write plays, particularly on the Tuesday nights, that you expect are challenging in a way that's way harder? What are you writing your...

Well, as we talked about on the Science vs. Magic episode, my approach generally with workouts is that I try to write things that are challenging, but that I expect people to be able to do. It's rare that I put something down that I don't think they can do.

Yeah, you admire the prediction of true ability.

And it's hard, I know. But if I tell them they can do it and they do it, then that's reinforcing. But as it relates to the writing down of workouts, I think Steve and I are similar in that we write macros in big chunks. But those macros are done in shorthand, where you'll say a shortcut name for a workout. Kanova Kays would be an example for him, some sort of Fartlake or 400-meter workout or whatever might be another example. But it's all done in shorthand. The specifics of the workout, where you're doing it, how many reps, what pace, and your rest interval are often written in real time as you're crafting that email. Because that kind of information needs to be informed by not just macro cycle planning, but also micro cycle planning. How's the group doing? What's the energy? What do we need in this moment? How did the last workout go?

Does your email address those micro components?

Well, I mean, we don't, I don't think either of us lay out our thought process there. But for me, writing it down is a way for me to kind of check myself on, does this fit? Once I put it on paper and look at it, does it seem to be right for what I was trying to accomplish with the macro cycle planning and what I think we need given the variables around?

Good question to both of you. Do you all spend a little bit of time before you actually send off your emails or do you kind of whip them out and send them? Like, in other words, are there is editing going on in the content of your email?

Zero editing is going on.

I'm a slow writer and I chronically reread and read.

I kind of figured the answers.

I know sometimes when Chris said that he reads that a couple of times, he's trying to figure out whether I have an added, I mistyped something.

Sometimes that comes up on Steve's where you're like, is that a typo or do you really want us to do that?

Is that really a big M?

Right, exactly. Because most of the time we're not sure.

Chris, you definitely on your Wednesday nights into, I mean, excuse me, your Thursday emails, you definitely hit the stride with community and sort of a broader reach. Can you speak some about the impact you're writing to with respect to that?

Sure, I mean, I want people to feel connected to something bigger and running broadly, which is why I do that. I call it, it's always the last bullet in my Thursday email, today's inspiration. And I'll pull a quote in, I'll pull a blog in, I'll pull in an article, I'll pull in a story to try to inspire. And sometimes that's connected to our community, where I'll share a story from our group. Sometimes it's from outside. And, but I think that piece in particular reminds people that they're not in this alone, that they're in this journey and path with others, whether they're at Rogue or whether they're in the broader running community, they're doing it with them. Or even as athletes, I mean, I shared an article two weeks ago about Michaela Schrifin, who's the US prodigy skier who's going to win two, maybe three gold medals in skiing this coming Olympics because the story talked a little bit about the mental side of her sport that I thought was applicable in our world, and I wanted people to be able to take those lessons into their running. So I also want to connect people to sport and to other athletes beyond running athletes. So that's part of it. But obviously also I'm including information about, hey, we've got these events coming up, be there, because it's a part of being a part of this community is coming to these things. You know, like we have, it'll have happened by the time this posts, but we have this Austin Marathon prep talk on Friday that I'm giving and Steve's doing the preaching for. And I told my runners, I said, look, whether you're running Austin or not, you should come. Because one, you're going to learn something that you might not have thought you'd learn even if you're not doing the race. And two, you can support the others that are going to be doing it.

I think that's really good. Which kind of leads to maybe the last kind of area of question I had for you on emails. You know, emails is pretty discreet. It's pretty specific. Steve, yours are very precise. X and O's, plays. Chris, you have kind of two versions. I'm sure your other coaches in the Rogue world have other ways to express. So thank you for sharing your own. I'd like to finish on impact. And you kind of mentioned one impact, and I think you had one, Steve, where sometimes when they don't get an email, it's like, hmm, what's going on? So that would be one impact we talked about. Do you all have just observations of the impacts? And it can be impacts of email on top of overlay of other things. I'm curious, like, how's the impact of this vehicle adding to the whole picture of Rogue?

Well, I can start. The, you know, there are those in my group who are waiting for the ding on their inbox on a Thursday, and then we'll go straight and read the whole email, which I appreciate, but again, is not required of my athletes, but there are those that hang on those words as they would on any of my words in person, and I think that's cool.

Yeah.

But as I reflect on this conversation, it's making me realize that these emails in a lot of ways are equivalent to stories around a fire for cavemen or for people in the Middle Ages that were conveying history through oral words then written, and in our community, that's essentially what it is. It's basically our form of storytelling that's passing the wisdom of Rogue and the ethos of the community on from athlete to athlete. And obviously there's those that have been around in Rogue for a long time that kind of get it and feel it. But when somebody comes in new to the community, being connected to those words on a page is a part of introduction to our form of storytelling and our culture, and that assimilates them in a way to the community that I don't think would happen without it.

You bet. That's a really nice way to say what I think in particular your Thursday night email. Steve, what do you got?

I think that sort of parachuting in on Chris' analogy, using it as a, is I just still think the email over, in all cases for me, will always be the directives and the coordinates to get to the Island of Lost Toys that we're all trying to get to. Or I don't look at it as a story.

Distrust alert.

I don't use it as a storytelling process. But I do know that if...

But you could.

I could. You would rock. I could. But that's not what I value. I value that stuff happening. I don't know. As I listen to Chris', you know, I've always known that Chris is providing much more content in the written word to his athletes. And it's incredibly valuable. Maybe I distrust the ability... I don't know that my... I sometimes think, well, my athletes don't really care about that. But I think they probably do. But I do think they get a little bit more out of me with my presence there. And if I overshare, in my opinion, from an email perspective, I'll be a little nervous that... I know I feel nervous that that will be the end of the game. That will be... The written word will be on the paper, and that's what they needed to get.

Have they ever said that to you? Or have they ever made comments that make you think that's true? Because I think they really enjoy the magic, and I'm not sure they'd dislike it if it was in written form.

No, it's not going to be there. Will it be there when it's...

It might not be magic?

It wouldn't be magic.

Would it be there the next morning? Would it be there the next morning when I actually see them? I'm just weighing... From the coaching process, I value the energy that happens on the course. In the... I mean, when Chris talks about how long it takes us to walk out the door, I get here 30 minutes before we start, always. Get the whiteboard set, get everything else done, and then it's 5.30, we're out the door at 5.31. I mean, I don't talk for more than a minute. Even that, usually it's like, do you see what's on the board? You got it? Anybody got any questions? Everybody's like, no, don't ask Steve a question. And then they go out the door. And then, to me, from that point on, that's when the magic happens. I don't see it happening in the written word, but I do know how Chris's version of it does that. I just don't feel...

It's not in the Steve.

Oh, it's in me. I could definitely do it. I can actually write. And I can actually write.

Okay.

But you know what? The other thing too is, Kevin, one thing that you didn't get is, I write a lot of emails to my athletes that aren't part of this one email I sent out.

This is the group email.

Correct. That's the part I distrust. I don't know that I want to put that out there.

At the end, I got you.

I don't know if you read any of the other ones that I sent.

No, I didn't get singles.

They're usually two paragraphs, three paragraphs long. Which makes sense. They get far more into the specifics for that athlete and why that workout didn't work for that athlete.

That's magic.

And there's where, in the written word, I'm doing it in that way.

So, can I just offer an invite to the listener? That speaks to me. For example, if somebody reads your micro, macro run play and just has a question, this probably happens, then you're really explanatory to their question.

If they actually get a response from me, because there are sometimes where they don't get that either.

One thing that's interesting, though, and reflecting on this is that we have this other group, Steve and I together, our podcast training group.

Oh, I've heard this is quite exciting.

That gets no email. It's very exciting. We've got 27 athletes from five countries.

This is interesting.

It's going great. But we have zero email. And very intentionally, we set it up without email.

Nice.

And so they get a 30-minute extra podcast, bonus content every week to explain the schedule and what they're doing, as well as usually have other tips. And then they have, or they're in a Facebook group where they can ask questions of us. And if they have individual questions, they have to ask it through the group so that everybody gets the benefit of the answers from us. Or people from the group can kind of share their own experiences.

That shows vulnerability in that group.

Yes, and it's been a really formative way to bond that group where they don't know each other and they haven't met us physically in person, but there's a distinct identity forming within that group, which is awesome.

That's Texas community right there.

Which is awesome. But there's no email, very intentionally, because we knew we had enough. But a Facebook post is. But we don't post a lot. I mean, I post once a week to say, hey, the podcast is up, maybe a few announcements.

And then we answer their posts.

But then we're answering questions.

But the answer is in the form of somebody posted something and you answered on that post.

Right. But we're not putting out a lot of proactive content there other than the audio they're getting.

Responsive content, got it.

So, but it's working, we think.

I think they would say so too.

They'll have to tell us, but we think it's working. But it's different, because it's absent email, completely.

But I think the energy is still good. Isn't email kind of an explanation for text that's conveyed back and forth between people?

An email, I think back in the day before people got into email, that is exactly, this is how it happened. They spent more time before the workout started to get all these things across. I mean, Chris didn't tell you that that podcast is 30 minutes long. Our description is 30 minutes long.

So they're getting the podcast, which is basically a proxy for two emails, because we've got the workout details as well as some of the other tips and other things.

The comments that you couldn't possibly realize to write in the email.

Don't tell my team, Rogue Group, that they're gonna switch over to the podcast group. They're gonna get way more value out of the podcast group.

But anyway, but it's fascinating. But my point with all of that is that I don't think necessarily email is the magic thing, but it's just, you know, when you're getting information in any form from your coach, you should be soaking up like a sponge, because that's your opportunity to build mastery, as we talked about, and also to connect to that person that you're trusting to get you to your goals.

I think I can summarize. Thank you all so much for your time and insights. I mean, it's basically necessity and opportunity, right? It's necessity because you're not gonna be prepared as a runner in Steve or Chris's group if you're not getting the content some way or other, and email's convenient. But it's opportunity, and yours as well, Steve. I mean, I read between the lines of your complex little M's and big M's. There's this real opportunity to get decades, I mean, years, and develop sense of what runners can do now to achieve the goals they want. And that opportunity, that leads to mastery, it leads to aptitude, wisdom, it leads to inspiration, it leads to motivation. All of these things are bundled in this random thing we decided to call email. But y'all are magic and science in my book, and I appreciate the opportunity to be here. Thank you, gentlemen.

Look how he did that. Look how he did that.

Right all the way back. And I would say, too, and I would just add that for those that aren't coached by us, or aren't coached, there's magic in the coach, and getting one if you don't have one, and then swallowing and being fed by whatever form of communication they use. So I wanna just use that as an opportunity for those that aren't coached out there to either look out for our next podcast rating group, which will start in May, or find a local coach who can give you that, because it's so important.

It's a wrap.

Well, thank you very much, Kevin.

You're welcome.

It was, as usual, enlightening.

Enlightening and always good. We'll have to have you on again. And if you haven't checked out episode 33 with Kevin on Alchemy of Running, Science or Magic, that's a good one, too. So thanks, everybody, for listening. As always, you can check us out at rogrunning.com or follow us on Instagram, Twitter or Facebook at Rogue Running. This has been episode 61 of the Running Rogue podcast. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.