Hey, everybody, welcome to the Running Rogue Podcast. This is our first episode, and we're excited to be broadcasting to you. We've got Steve here with us, and my name is Chris. We are from Rogue Running in Austin, Texas. We're a running store and training center. We've been training athletes for various events from 5Ks up to marathons and ultra marathons since 2004. And we decided that we've got some things that we need to share and maybe get off our chest. But we've been doing this for over 12 years, and we've learned a lot about running and training, and so we've got a lot to talk about and things to share. So today is our first episode in hopefully sharing some training tips that can help make you all better runners.

Boom, boom.

Welcome, Steve. Good to have you.

Thanks, Chris. I'm looking forward to this.

So this will be an experiment each week, so join us in the journey. We're gonna start by giving brief introductions on ourselves so you know who you're listening to, and then we're gonna go through in about 30 to 40 minutes, three parts. We're gonna start with a little news and talk about some current running events that may be relevant to you out there. Then we're gonna talk about a topic each week, and this week we're gonna be talking about kind of core training principles. And then finally, we're gonna finish it off with a training tip to leave you as you head off. But first, quick introductions. Again, my name is Chris. I'm one of the co-owners and coaches at Rogue, and I'm a runner myself, although not an elite one. I grew up playing soccer and got into running later in life and it's become a passion of mine, not only to do myself, but to share with others. So I coach a group on Wednesday mornings here in Austin, and it has become something that really is my life, work and life kind of blend together, which is fun because it's always an adventure. Steve is joining, he's actually the founder of Rogue, and a former elite level athlete, as well as collegiate coach, so he knows a lot more than I do. I'll let Steve give a brief intro.

Sure, it's very hard for me to be brief with anything, but I'll do my best. I've been running since I was six and started racing when I was eight, so I have a lot of long-term running experience, but mostly these days, I spend a lot more time thinking about coaching, thinking about how to get athletes to perform at the best level they can. Formerly, I was a coach for a post-collegiate group called Rogue AC, or Rogue Athletic Club. We shuttered those doors recently, and I've been focusing more on my adult marathoning and adult marathon of 5K and 10K groups, so I have a lot of fun, a lot of experience coaching at all different levels, from beginners to advanced, but I'm super excited about this opportunity to share some of the ideas that Chris and I have about coaching and sort of the history of things and just bounce around. So I'm really looking forward to this.

Yeah, so we'll see where it goes. Steve recently coached an athlete at the Rio Olympics, Steeplechaser from Great Britain, Lenny Waite, who grew up in Austin, so he's come off some pretty, pretty nice accolades there.

Thanks, Chris.

All right, so as we go into it today, we're gonna, as I said, talk about a little bit of news that you might be seeing out there on the interwebs. The first thing we're gonna do is cover something that came out yesterday, this press release and Runner's World article that many have seen about Nike and their project to try to break the two-hour barrier in the marathon. So we'll start it this way, Steve. Just a question for you. Would you characterize this as a gimmick or something that you think is a real substantive contribution to the running world?

You know, I'm kind of torn about whether or not this is just a promotional ploy by Nike to try to get more people to pay attention to them and their running products and all the other things that they're trying to do from a financial standpoint and the long-term substantive, really incredibly important long-term contribution they've made to track and field and marathoning in general. I mean, where would we be as a running culture if Nike wasn't doing what it was doing? I'm torn. I'm not the biggest Nike lover in the world. So, you know, it's hard to say. One thing I do think that's really important to think about, though, is these, even if it is just a promotional stunt, I mean, it's going to bring people to start thinking more and more about what is humanly possible. And the sub-four-minute mile still has this resonance throughout and the general public around the world that really means something. And while the sub-two-hour marathon doesn't, it seems to be the only thing that we have left that people can really sort of get behind and say, wow, this would be really, really cool. So I'm kind of torn on both sides. What do you think?

Ah, God, I tend to land in the camp of it being a gimmick that isn't necessarily good for the sport, but you know me, I'm a little bit of a cynic. I think the problem with it is this. One, the current world record for context for people is two hours, two minutes and 57 seconds. So this would be slicing essentially three minutes off the world record. They're saying they can do this in early 2017 and have admitted essentially that they're gonna have to cheat, so to speak, in order to get it to happen. So it's not gonna happen in an open marathon. It's gonna happen in very controlled conditions, perhaps with the aid of a downhill course or some sort of tailwinds that they artificially create or maybe put springs and shoes as some of the speculation is that's out there. So it's a little bit of a gimmick anyway. They know they can't get there legitimately, so they're gonna have to do some things to stack the deck in the favor of the push. And so I feel like the challenge with doing it that way is that you, one, if they don't get it, you get all this kind of energy and buzz, and then if people see it doesn't happen, then they kind of turn away and find the next thing to look to. But also it devalues some of the real work that goes into marathon performances at that level or at any level. And so that's the frustrating part for me. If you look at the athletes they've chosen, there's certainly three of the best marathoners out there. You've got-

Well, two of the best marathoners out there.

Two of the best, and one of the best half-marathoners out there. So Kipchoge Dissisa from Ethiopia and Tedisi from Eritrea, who is that half-marathon world record holder. So all of them have credentials. For those that don't know, Kipchoge was the Olympic gold medalist and arguably the greatest marathoner perhaps of all time. He hasn't broken the world record, but he was five seconds short or six seconds short, I think, in one of his efforts. I think the other thing that's interesting to note in this whole discussion is that if you look at the last three world record holders, including the current one, Dennis Cameto, they're all Adidas athletes. So this is another shot across the bow in the Nike versus Adidas war out there.

Yeah, you know, another really interesting thing to think about too in this process is in 1991, Michael Joyner, who is an anesthesiologist of all things from the Mayo Clinic, put out an article or put out basically a calculation trying to figure out the physiological limit of a man in the marathon. So basically looking at the perfect athlete under perfect conditions, his prediction was 157, 58. So that's two full minutes underneath. So again, now this is just some crank sitting in, sorry, no offense, Michael, but this is some guy sitting in an ivory tower trying to run the numbers to figure these things out. But people have been keeping that, you have to keep that in mind in this process. I don't think, I think that chasing a two hour barrier, here are my basic rules. You can't do a downhill race. You have to do it with, I'm okay with people breaking all the IAAF rules. I'm not really attached to all those things, but it needs to be something that legitimately the human population can look at and say reasonable.

That's a human result, and not something that was artificial.

No PEDs, which hopefully they'll be doing some consistent testing. All three of these athletes have been long-term clean in their career. No one has really had any, there haven't been any questions about them. And again, I mean, Iliad Kachogi is the greatest marathoner of all time. I think it's definitive in my point of view. And he's lends a level of credence to this task that sort of takes it outside of pure promo and pure bullshit. I think there's something real about it. So I'm interested to see where it goes and what happens. I think a little bit of background too, is folks should go out and get Ed Caesar's book, Sub 2, which is a really, really good book and highly recommended, sort of some context to this. He's also writing for The Wired Magazine, a consistent articles following the progress. And in himself, he's like 6'5", I think, and weighs 240. And his at the same time, she's trying to break 130 and a half. So there are some other cool things going on with this project that I think will lend some credence to it. And you know, anything Wired gets behind, I kind of think is an interesting process.

It's always interesting. And I think if there is a good thing to come out of it, if I take my cynics hat off for a second, is that the lessons from it might help all athletes in terms of figuring out how to optimize training results.

Yeah, isn't that Nike's basic point? I mean, their statement is, we know that we're gonna be setting these up under ideal conditions that aren't gonna be replicated in any other place, but hopefully it'll get people thinking about what can be done. And again, that's the value, I think, of Michael Joyner's calculations from 1991. I mean, people have sort of really sloughed that off and said there's no possibility, there's no way, but the human spirit can do amazing things, and I will always be a believer that the cynics are proven wrong all the time by absolute, incredible human performance. So I'm not all in, but I'm gonna be watching it with baited breath and watching everything that happens.

So it's gonna be fun to watch. Now, one, I think, fun thought exercise for those that are out there. If you think about running a two-hour marathon, that's 434 per mile, which equates to about a 68-second lap. So if you got all your friends together, and let's say you had 20 of them, and you wanted to do it as a relay, you'd have to each run 68-second laps for over 100 laps. That's hard to even think about, much less having one person do it for the full two hours.

Well, I think most of your Americans are gonna think that anything people are already doing right now, and a 202.57 that's already beyond the scope of what we can consider. And I've run a half marathon in 103, and I cannot conceive of the possibility of running 26.2, but people are doing it. And I think that people are doing it clean. I'm not sure that everyone's doing it clean, but people are doing it clean. So as they like to call it, this is the, I guess, we'll see what happens with this moonshot marathon that they've got planned out.

But we will see breaking to, follow that with Nike. You can check out more on Runners World. They have an article on their homepage on it. Okay, so let's talk about our topic. So as we mentioned in the introduction, Steve and I are both coaches with Rogue Running in Austin. And Rogue began in 2004 as a training program, essentially, when Steve had the vision to create training programs for the everyday athlete modeled after the principles that elite athletes train with. A lot of the programming at the time and even still now is largely watered down for the everyday runner, thinking that that everyday runner can't handle the same training. But you said, no, that's not true. They can handle the same training. It might be different paces, but all the principles still apply. And so what we wanted to do in this initial podcast, we'll just talk about some of the foundational training principles of elite athlete training that we really truly believe in. A lot of this is based on Arthur Lydiard's philosophy. Now, some of it has certainly evolved and deviated from that over time, but we're going to talk about five core training principles that we believe in at Rogue and that we think are important for everybody to think about if they want to be their best running self. Before we dive into those five principles, I wanted to get from you, Steve, a quick background on Lydiard. He's a New Zealand, an old Kaji New Zealander that trained his guys on the farms of New Zealand. And so, he kind of came upon the scene, the world scene at the Olympic level, and shocked everybody. So give us some more context on his background.

Well, he shocked the world in 1960 at the Rome Olympics when he had basically Peter Snell, Murray Hallberg, in the context of basically one hour. He had two athletes, medal, one with an Olympic gold, and Hallberg, I think he won the, no, he won the gold, too, so they had two golds. And then they had John Davies, no, Barry McGee, get the bronze medal in the marathon, that same Olympiad. So he burst on the scene from seemingly nowhere. Arthur was a, as Chris said, cantankerous, to say the least. I had an opportunity to meet him in the last year of his life, and an amazingly charismatic individual, but also hard-headed, thought what he thought, and was not real open to other people's points of view. But he started out himself just trying to get in shape. He was out of shape, smoking like a pack of cigarettes a day or something like that, and just started getting out on the roads in New Zealand, trying to get himself in shape. He got to the point where he actually, I think, got second or third in a major marathon at a world level, and sort of just did a DIY process of trying to figure out how the human body functions. He wasn't a scientist. He didn't bring clear scientific methods to the process. He wasn't in a lab anywhere. I mean, Peter Schnell, his best pupil, ended up becoming a PhD in exercise phys and runs the Cooper Institute up in Dallas now. But he comes at it from a completely non-scientific route. He was systematic, but not scientific. But the results, if you look at the results that he had, direct medals, he had 1960, he had three medals. 1964, he had Peter Schnell win the 800 and the 1500. John Davies got the bronze in the 1500. His indirect gold medals, I think, are even more impressive. Lorraine Moller, who was coached by John Davies, who was a bronze medalist in 1964, she won the bronze in the marathon. And really, the other person people could call the goat, which is the greatest of all time and probably will always be the greatest of all time in my mind, Lassie Viren, he won golds in 1972 and 1976 in both the 5K and the 10K directly in this Lydiard lineage. And people could argue around the world that a lot of what's going on in East African, the way they train is directly in line with the stuff that Arthur Lydiard did.

Most modern distance training is founded in some way in those principles. Obviously, it's evolved.

Absolutely.

And you'd have some different schools of thought out there. But he was sort of the founding father of modern distance training. And the thing that was crazy, I think, with him is people were like, New Zealand wasn't on the world scene. That all of a sudden, New Zealand was on the world scene winning medals. And not just medals in one event or one off, it was several athletes from the 800 meters to the marathon. And suddenly people were like, what's going on down in New Zealand? And the world found out. It was also rumored, I hear, that Lydiard himself ran over 200 miles a week at one point as he experimented on himself.

Yeah, he definitely went through the paces himself. He was not a do as they say, not as I do coach. That's for sure.

But the founding principles, I think, are somewhat counterintuitive to some degree, or maybe they're not superintuitive, especially for the lay person who might be thinking, how can I get faster? And I think a lot of people go out when they start running and they might pick a three or four or five mile loop around their house. And they think, if I just try to run that loop faster every day, then I'll get faster. Well, it's a lot more complicated than that. So we're going to talk about five core training principles and what each one means, and a little bit of how you might apply that in your training world. The first one, which is really the kind of core of Lydiard, and many people may know him for this, is that the miles make the champion. Miles matter.

Yeah, you've got to do the work. And he's got a bad rap over the last few years. I mean, over in the 70s and the 80s, people started to say that he was a proponent of what people call LSD, or long slow distance. And a lot of that came out of, he was a huge influence on Bill Bowerman at a crucial time in Bill Bowerman. He was the head coach at the University of Oregon, and was coach of Steve Prey-Fontaine and many other amazing US distance runners. But it was Bill Bowerman's sort of idea about getting people jogging that really exploded this jogging craze that happened in the 70s. That, along with Frank Shorter's 1972 Olympic gold medal in the marathon, really just opened Americans to this sport that was really popular around the world, but not so popular in the United States. I think that all those guys in that 70s, the ethos in that time was run as many miles as you can, and they all came from this basic principle of getting aerobic development. You know, another really interesting thing is, at the time, the training models were mostly about, all about doing interval work, lots and lots of interval work. People would run pretty substantial miles in an interval mode. So they would run maybe 10 miles in a day with lots of 100s, like 100 repeat after 100 repeat, or 200 repeat after 200 repeat, and still get a good amount of mileage, but then they might not run for another couple of days, or they would run really easy running. And his view was just to continue to get the aerobic machine rolling, you just keep running mile after mile. And, you know, Peter Schnell, 800 meter runner, still at the times that he's run for the 800, he would be competitive at the world level to this day. You know, what is this now? 50 plus years later, he did a 20 mile run almost every Sunday over the hills in New Zealand. So this model was a complete throwing up ending of what was considered normal or reasonable in training. And I think that might have had a little bit to do with things too. So the idea of stretching the boundaries a little bit made people believe they could do things they might not have been able to believe otherwise.

So you mentioned a half mile or doing a 20 mile long run. And so some people might listening, looking into a 5K are probably now scared that you're gonna get to tell them to run 20 miles on a Saturday. You have, and so let's get people context on that. You have this phrase that you use when you're describing new people in training that you call them aerobic babies of sorts. So talk about the physiological elements that are going in, that are in play here as we develop the aerobic system.

It's a really simple, basic physiology. We, you build the capillary base necessary for transporting oxygen to your working muscles. And the way that that happens by running submaximal for extended periods of time. These scientific principles were determined somewhere in the 50s and the 60s. And I think even before, after the fact that Lydiard had already sort of found this as was working in the machines and the bodies that he was working with, we found out that this was actually true. And basically, you've got to get as much oxygen to your working muscles as possible. And the way that you do that is to build up red blood cells. And the red blood cells have to be built up by running slow, not really slow, slow, but running easy mileage. And so what I have found over the years is that the best approach is to get people running and running consistently. And for many people who are just beginners, that means walking for a little while and then running till you feel tired and then walking for a little while and then running till you feel tired. But the goal should be to stay out for extended periods of time and get your body acclimated and adjusted. Because I also know one of the things I love to say is a human body can adapt to any stress if you give it enough time. And while I don't ask and propose that people should all run 100 miles a week as Lydiard did, his view was if you don't run 100 miles a week, you're wasting your time. I do think that the more miles you can run, the better. And that's our approach at Rogue. And with every athlete that I've ever coached is where's the law of diminishing returns with that? Well, that's, you know, some of the other principles we'll be talking about that Lydiard was a proponent of are important in that regard, but doesn't change the fact that no matter where you're at, you need to extend the amount of time that you're running. And the best way to do that is to run a little bit slower than what you might normally run. And that's a little wire that LSD, or long slow distance, sort of misnomer came about. But it's true for beginner and intermediate level runners.

Because if you slow down, you can be consistent and healthy.

Correct.

Because a lot of times people get out there, they start running, they go too fast, they break down, and then they stop. And then there goes the miles.

The calves, the Achilles, they can't take the load that fast running puts on them. And as we age, those become even less resilient. They're less able to handle really ballistic, hard pushing off that happens when you run fast. So now running slow and easy has its own problems that can happen over time, and so adjusting paces are important. But for the point of our conversation about the real revolutionary approach that Arthur Lydiard brought was you have to do the work, and you have to put the miles make champions, which is just such a crucial, crucial view. That's the base training that many of your programs that people will look at and find in books all over the bookshelves and the internet in the world about what basic fundamental training is. Building a base, getting those initial aerobic, easy run miles in is crucial to long-term success.

And it's something that I think it's important to note too, it's something that happens over a period of years, not months. A lot of times people think of running goals in short-term windows, but really, your aerobic journey is a multi-year process. You can continue to develop those aerobic system elements for many, many years, and if you keep it up, you should continue to see improvement.

The only thing that will limit you is getting hurt. So that's the whole point, is try to not to stay within the realm of what your body can handle and what your body can manage, but still continuing to get up every day and be consistent. I think that's the real key of Lydiard system, that miles make champions is more consistency.

All right, so number one, miles matter, miles make champions, so run more, simply put. Second one, he talked a lot about feeling-based training, and I know in our world today where the Garmin and these watches that track everything from pace to distance to steps has become really popular, but in some ways it can be counterproductive. So when he's making the point about feeling-based training, what, how do you interpret that?

Listen to your body. You know, it's a fundamental approach that we think is the antithesis of getting better or getting stronger or getting faster. We think culturally, if X is good, then X plus must be better. And that's not necessarily the truth. You need to do, you want to continue to do more. You want to run more miles. You want to run faster as you can. But it always needs to be done in a context where you're checking in with what's happening aerobically within your body, what's happening with your feet on the ground, what's happening with your breathing, what's happening even in your head in terms of is this hard, is this easy? And beginning to create a dialogue between the head and the heart that says, okay, I can manage this, I can handle this. And yoga has a great term called flow, or flow yoga is an entire approach that took the sort of the complete pose process of you had to hit these poses and be basically a human contortionist in order to be effectively a yoga person. In the 70s and the 80s, some real innovators came around and said, no, let's make these poses go through a wide range of movements that are all interconnected and that are flowing, and that required listening to your body. And that flow process, being connected with what's going on physiologically, but what also is going on in your mind mentally, and also what might be going on in terms of what that crucial thing of feeling is, is really important to the running process. And I think Lydiard doesn't get enough credit for really pushing that view. Those famous 20-mile runs that Peter Schnell was doing back in the 60s, they were no paces. Arthur gave no, okay, you're gonna run this run in this amount of time. It was always, what are you gonna do today based on what the workouts we did this past week, how they affected, what workouts we might have coming up over the coming weeks, and roll as it goes and see how it feels. And not only did they have a fantastic and sort of fun time, mates chatting about whatever they were chatting about and talking about whatever goes on in the world because they were able to hold on a conversation, but they were also getting amazing aerobic development and going back to that point that we were making early on about the Miles Make Champions. So this feeling-based approach I think is really essential. And you know, the Garmin, it's still valuable. You know, I still think I'm not a Luddite. You mean, I truly do think that we need to take advantage of these, of the technologies that are available to us. But I think that they need to be processed through what the body can handle and what the body does, because it's a huge part of who we are as human beings. We can't take hundreds of thousands of years of human evolution and throw it into the dustbin because my Garmin tells me I'm running 2% slower than I thought I should have been running, and so therefore, I must be an epic failure. I just can't go down that road and think that that's appropriate. So Arthur was ahead of the game.

Yeah, it's important as a feedback mechanism, but not something you should be a slave to. One of the things I often remind my runners of is that oftentimes when we're doing a workout, whatever it may be, the effort can be more important than the pace. A lot of times, and especially if somebody's training for a longer distance race, like a half marathon or marathon, oftentimes you're doing speed work at lower intensities to develop economy at those race level paces. And so I often remind them that it's not necessary, if you feel good, it isn't necessarily about pushing harder to find the pain like we like to do in our society, but it's more about making that effort feel as easy as you can. That's where the magic is, is finding efficiency at those target paces. And most of the time, we're not wired to think that way. We think unless we're hurting, unless we're stressed, that something's not working.

So yeah, I mean, we're in Southern, I mean, in Central Texas, in Austin, we get really hot summers. And if I took the approach for getting folks ready for the Chicago Marathon and say we were gonna hit Marathon goal pace in July, no matter what, that I would be killing my athletes. And it's just not something that makes sense some of the time. And so while it's important to occasionally get to those places so that your body can handle it in the race, we also need to be much more cognizant about what's going on within the body. And it's a key piece of any training program, the people who end up doing the best in races, in my opinion, are almost always those folks who have the ability to self-regulate and to know where they're at.

Okay, first one, miles matter. Second one, feeling-based training is super important. The third thing we'll talk about, it's got a lot in it, is sort of every day has a purpose. As I mentioned earlier, a lot of times people go out and they run the same pace on the same course every day. They think that'll make them better. But really, if you think about it, your paces should vary from day to day to work different parts of the aerobic system, and that should change over time as you approach your goal race. So talk about every day has a purpose.

Well, we've learned in the world of exercise physiology over the last five to 10 to 15 years, and we've seen these absolute amazing performances from the East African athletes that are running. They will go back and say, their coaches have gone back and said, the most important thing that they did was allow their athletes to adapt. So they created, they kept changing critical workouts at critical times to make sure their body would adapt to get to the highest level they could possibly get to. And so those coaches have the ability to look at their athletes on a day-to-day basis, make adjustments to what they're doing, and making sure that that easy days are a set amount of easy and that the hard days are at a set amount of hard, but they're always looking forward to making some kind of adaptation. And that was Lydiard's, one of his foundational principles was what he called response regulation adaptation or response regulated recovery. And this basic idea comes down to everyday having a purpose and making sure that you're doing what you're supposed to be doing that day. To run too hard on a recovery day is to ruin the cake. It's to add salt. If you decide to add salt to your cake instead of sugar, it's gonna taste like shit. So you need to know what each process, what every ingredient is in the cake that you're trying to bake, and make sure that you're putting the right thing in. Just because it's white and it's granular doesn't mean it's the right thing. So knowing what every day is, what you're trying to do in every day, and then also making sure that you're changing what's happening. And the best coaches in the world, and the best coaches at every level, what are they doing? They're looking at what the body is doing, what their athlete's doing as a body, and they make subtle, gradual changes. Rogue, one of the things I do as a coach is make sure no workout is the same, almost never the same in any training cycle. I either change the amount of recovery, or I change the amount of speed that they're going. I change the distance they're going. Some piece of the puzzle changes, and that comes from Arthur Lydiard's, knowing exactly what you're doing, listening to the feedback that your athletes give you from their feeling based, and then plugging in these specific, regulated responses to get the result that you want to from a training perspective.

What analogy I use sometimes, because I think it's counterintuitive. You think, well, I need to run slower some days to get faster. That's a counterintuitive thought. And so one analogy that I use for people, because most people can understand this, is that if you're a weightlifter and you're trying to get stronger and lift more weight on your bench press, for example, most of the time you go to the gym, you're doing higher reps of lower weight. And then occasionally you'll go do more weight, and then occasionally you'll max out to see if those things have improved. But doing that higher number of reps at lower weight is equivalent in our world to running slower and longer certain days. And if you think about it that way, it starts to make a little bit more sense. I think you mentioned sort of every day having a purpose within the context of a week, but also within our programming, people will see different workouts as you get closer to race day. So talk about how you might go through different periods of training as you build towards your goal.

Yeah, so periodization is another fundamental principle that Arthur Lydiard introduced. And periodization has changed in our programming over the years in terms of first doing with a big base or adding 5K training at certain sections of it. And we've made a lot of, I've had the wonderful experience of having thousands and thousands of guinea pigs at Rogue over the course of a 14-year career working with athletes at the adult level and being able to run people through a whole lot of really tough programming to see what the adult who has a full-time job and a family and are balancing all the crazy things that need to be balanced in our modern world, what can they actually handle? And we've come to the point where we realize that what you might give to the elite athlete at Iliad Kipchoge is not necessarily what you would give to Jane Blow. You're gonna give them something different. And so what we have determined is mostly we take the season we're in, the weather conditions we have, and the race distance that they're going to choose. People will hear me say a lot. What does the race require? Someone who's running a 5K race, they require something very different from somebody who's running a marathon. But what we try to do is keep fundamental principles the same of building a base while trying to get some faster speed work in, then go through a strength phase where we maybe do a lot more hill running, which is never a problem in Austin. And then finally, we try to put the icing on the cake with some specific marathon-based or 5K-based, whatever their race is, we go back to that real specific training for the race that they're going to be running, and then we put a bow on it with the taper and let them roll on down the road. So I think that these things that I just explained, how that process works, is all foundational to what Arthur Lydiard was doing from the beginning.

So that's a good segue, too. So we mentioned third principle every day has a purpose. That leads into our fourth, which is that peaking matters. I mean, he was a big believer that you gotta get people ready for a race on a day. This is something you call gearing up for a command performance. But this idea is that the human body doesn't develop linearly. It sort of cycles. And if you're using periodization, you're gonna build to a peak, a point where you can get a command performance, and then ultimately you might fall off a little bit before you rebuild again. So talk about that. What does that mean?

Well, I don't know. This, I'm a little bit confrontational about this particular issue. I'm a big believer in command performances. It probably comes from my long-term experience as a track athlete. And I've always believed that the greatest performance is one in which you go absolutely to the edge of what you're capable of. And if you're running a marathon every fifth week, it's not possible. You're not gonna know what the limits of what you're able to do is gonna be because you're gonna be broken down, down along the line. And so command performance means taking a vision of who you are and what you wanna get accomplished as an athlete, putting a big, hairy, audacious goal out there in advance, and then taking consistent steps along the line to get where you need to be. I coach a group of pretty advanced level marathoners, especially for our adult population, and I tell all of them when they sit down with me, my program will be most effective for you 18 months from now. If you don't have 18 months and you don't give me 18 months, I can't guarantee you the end result that you want. And if you're not capable of thinking 18 months in advance, then this might not be the right program for you because I'm going to be working with Lydiard's basic principles to get a command performance down the road. You know, in the track and field world, this is understood inherently because athletes are trying to get better over a one-year period with three seasons maybe or over a four-year period as a high school athlete or a college athlete. And for those at the very top level who are looking at Olympic trials or Olympiads, they're going in another four-year cycle. So that really is inside of their natural psyche to say, okay, there's four-year process to all the steps I'm taking. When you come back to the adult world and people want to have a PR yesterday or they want to get a Boston qualifier immediately or they want a PR in the next week, it's really hard for me to even process that. I do it and I know that every human being wants to feel success and have success in any programming that they're doing. But it's also critical and crucial to know that you can't trick the body in terms of the way it adapts and you can't beat, and if you're going to be a marathoner, you're not going to beat the marathon without having gone up against some really difficult racing experiences. Experience is crucial. So, you know, that's our view is command performance with a long-term vision to what you're trying to accomplish. And the experience of having achieved that, we had a girl who trained with us for many, many years, Nora Colligan, who Chris recruited to come to our team many years ago, and she had this long-term goal of making it to the Olympic trials. And, you know, six months before the Olympic trials, before her great qualifying race, I would have told you, I didn't think there was a snowball's chance in hell that she was gonna get to the Olympic trials. I just didn't think that there was any way we were gonna be able to do it. But we had gotten together, you know, two years before that, or maybe even longer than that, together, and worked consistently towards the goal as we got closer and closer to the race. She started adapting really well, and started getting these performances. She ended up missing the qualifier for the Olympic trials, and then they changed the qualifying time in the window that she had. But that experience that she had of getting that qualifier, I can guarantee you there will only be two or three other experiences in her life, probably being married, getting married, and having children that will compare to that setting this huge, crazy goal, achieving it. And to be a part of that process, to me, was just unbelievable. It's so cool, and that's what a command performance is. It's not just to get what you want, but it's to have a good life. It's to have an amazing life.

It's cool stuff. And for her, it wasn't just a six-month journey. It was a 10-year journey.

That's correct.

And I've known Nora for 10 years, so it was fun to see that play out over time. I think the shorthand version of this last one of Peaking Matters is that you can't take shortcuts. You have to go through the process, and you have to look at it with a long-term view. Arthur Lydiard is famous for a story around the Olympics where his athletes went out and did a 400-meter workout a couple weeks prior to the race in the Olympic Stadium. I think this was the Tokyo Olympics. And they nailed this workout. There were other athletes watching them. And the next day, one of the Canadian competitors came out and did the exact same workout. And there was a media member there commenting on it and asking Lydiard what he thought about this athlete matching the workout his athletes had done the day before. And he said, well, that was the last nail in his coffin. And the guy said, well, what do you mean? He did the same workout that you guys did yesterday. And Lydiard said, well, my guys needed it. He didn't. And so that sort of underscores this point where you have to put all the pieces together in the right order and do it in the right way. Otherwise, you might overcook yourself or you might not be ready.

Yeah, there's only one shortcut. That's Hills. And that's John Davies has said that many, many years ago. He was one of Arthur Lydiard's athletes and was a coach to Lorraine Moller, who was an Olympian and a medalist. So yeah, the only shortcut is Hills. We use those a lot, but they exact a high price as well, so.

All right, so the last one. So that was Peaking Matters. There's no shortcuts. The last point that was critical for Lydiard, he had a group of 800 meters to marathoners training together and it's critical to our world. We have a hashtag we've been using this year called Run Rogue Together. But group-based training is important, not only for the accountability. If you know somebody's gonna be waiting for you at 5.30 in the morning, it's easier to get up and get to do it, but also to pushing yourself, it's important to have those people around you. So talk about group-based training.

There's absolutely nothing like another person in front of you to extend what you're capable of. I don't know how many times I have seen individuals who would tell me that they couldn't do X, but because Sally did X, they suddenly knew they could do it. And it only happens when you're training with other people. It's easier to get burned out when you're training by yourself. It's easier to overdo it when you're training by yourself. And that's one of the things we really stress at Rogue when people first join us is, many of you are not ready for a steak, and you need to eat baby food first to get started. But if you have patience and consistency and you get attached to the ethos and the esprit de corps that's going on with the group that you're in, eventually you'll find yourself moving up that food chain to the point where you're eating exactly what you want to be eating, because you see the vision in front of you by those ahead of you. Anybody who has a coach will get great advice from a coach, and while I do believe everyone should have a coach, I have vested interest in that personally, but I really truly believe that many people have too many blind spots, and they don't have the ability to see where their blind spots are, and that's the value of a coach. I still think a person with a training group who's self-coached is better off than a coached person running by themselves. It's so important to have a group of people to keep you consistent, to keep you honest, and to run past you and keep you accountable for the things that you want day to day. Now, there is a flip side to that where people have a tendency to overrun when they first join groups, or to jump into a group that's a little bit too fast for what they can handle. My experience has been just a well, if you're running in a group, you probably have a coach, and then you have someone in that group who's able to, the coach or another athlete who's able to tap you on the shoulder and say, maybe that's a little bit much for today. In my team Rogue group, we have a new guy that joined our group. I'm not gonna name him by name. He might actually listen to this, but we've nicknamed him Jack Wagon because he has this tendency to just go off the front in every single run. He's young and he's dumb and he's full of energy and excitement. So we're watching this process, but I have so many great assistant coaches on my team that many of them have been able to rein him in. He just ran a race this weekend and followed the plan that we had for him. And one of his teammates, as soon as he came across the line, she leaped back to him and said, see, following a plan and running with other people, it makes a lot of sense. So I do think that there's just so much more joy, there's so much more feeling and we're social animals, you know? We want to test the limits of what we're capable of, but you could test the limits of what you're capable of just by yourself, and it doesn't have anywhere near the same kind of meaning as if you do it with other people.

I always say running is only a solo sport if you let it be. And so any new person out there or someone that might be starting, find a group that will help you get to your goals. And if you're in Austin, come see us at roguerunning.com. We've got lots of options for you, over a thousand in our community. So with that, I wanna quickly summarize again. Five principles, miles matter, number one. Two, it's all about feeling-based training. Three, every day has a purpose. Four, peaking matters, so don't take any shortcuts. Follow the program and the steps with a long-term view. And number five, find a group. Find some people that you can run with and do life with on those miles together. With that, we're gonna wrap that section and kind of finish it off with a final training tip that we've just given a lot of training tips, but this will be kind of apropos for this week. We've got, coming up this weekend for us, we've got what we call a race prep, where basically you go on your longer run, and we don't do this often, maybe three or four times a training cycle, and you incorporate some of your target goal pace into that training run. A lot of the schedules I think I see out online, oftentimes it's about covering the distance, so you'll see a lot of the Saturdays are just an easy long run. But we think it's really important to build that race pacing into certain long runs to practice and get ready for race day. So talk about that. How important is it? And maybe give an example workout for a marathon, or just so people have context.

Sure, so, you know, we talked about one of our overriding principles at Rogue is to, what does the race require? And it's really dangerous to run 26.2 miles at marathon goal pace. If you do that, you might as well have run your race. So does it make sense to do the full distance at the pace that you're trying to run, unless you're doing that on race day? So, but what you do need to do is to have some ability to understand pacing, which is the first most important part of what's going on with these race prep type workouts, is what is the rhythm of that pace that you're running? So that's the first point. Number two, it's to extend the period of time that you're running at those paces, and to begin to acclimate the mind and the body to the overall long-term stress that's going to be required to finish the run. And you can do that sub maximally by not going the 26.2 miles, but breaking it into chunks and giving yourself an opportunity to run at those paces. So it's pacing and getting the rhythm. It's also preparing for the load that's going to be happening in the race. And finally, to me, one of the very most important parts of it is you got to be a little nervous the night before, set out your clothes, get your fuel ready for what's going to happen. And it's a dress rehearsal for what's going to be happening on race day. We really pump up our athletes beforehand and try to get them excited about what's going to happen and make them know that these things are important. And the only way that you can get ready for that is either to race or to do these kinds of race prep. So there are threefold real reasons. Number one, get the pacing, get the rhythm, what 26.2 is going to be. Number two, get the feel for what you're going to have to do to extend this distance out over time. And then finally, get at least as prepared as possible for what that race is going to throw at you on that Sunday that you run your marathon.

So dress rehearsal includes things like wearing the same shoes and clothes you're going to wear on race day, eating the same gels or blocks or whatever you might do.

Eating your breakfast an hour and a half, two hours before, how early do you get up? And then maybe roll back over and go back to sleep. It's practicing those crucial and important things that are going to be nerve wracking on race day. You're going to wonder if it was right to wake up five minutes before or five minutes after. Well, at least all of our engineers in the world will be in that mindset of what would be best. And so if you've practiced, you've been able to sort of calm down that stress. You'll have a plan of attack for what to go through. So an example workout might be for, let's say, you know, all of our beginner runners who are running a marathon, we don't do the race pace work. We don't do the race prep stuff for them on this, on that Saturday. They will do race pace stuff and marathon base pace stuff and their other quality workouts throughout the season. But we feel like getting to the finish line of a marathon your first time is a big enough goal and it's important enough that we don't really push that. But our intermediate and advanced level runners, this is an example of what they might do. We have the benefit for us of having to get the chance to run on part of the Austin Marathon course for this race prep for our group. So what we'll be doing is about a two and a half mile warm up to get to the start of where the race starts from our store. And then they'll do four miles at their marathon goal pace on the race itself. If you're not able to run on the marathon course that you want to, you should go to the website of where the race is, look at the elevation chart and try to find something reasonably close to the kind of first few miles you'll be experiencing on race day so that you can get a feel for that rhythm and what the pace feels like. Because believe it or not, for most people, marathon goal pace feels really slow. It's not as slow as your easy run, but it doesn't feel like you're racing, especially in those first five to 10 miles. It's very easy to go too fast. So we do about four miles, then they run about two miles easy, and then they'll do another section of three to five miles depending on their ability level so that they've got an opportunity to run more miles after a break at their marathon goal pace. And then for many of them, they'll just finish their 20 or 22 mile run because by the end of that 20 to 22 mile run, they will be feeling the physiological bang that 20 miles plus mileage will give to you, and they'll be able to start to think through the mental challenges they're going to have to overcome in that final 10K. So you don't have to go through all the specifics of your marathon in order to have a great marathon training experience. But you have to go through some of them, or everything is so novel and new, and the pain is so different that it's extremely hard to overcome that need to walk or to quit or to throw the towel in from a goal time perspective. Another quote I'm pretty famous for, you'll be hearing from me frequently, is that the marathon always wins. This is something that I truly believe. I think each athlete maybe gets one or two marathons in an entire career where everything goes perfectly and everything goes well and everything goes amazing. And so preparing for the fact that you're going to have to go through the dark night of the soul is an essential part of the process. So we train that here at Rogue. For our half marathoners, they do similar things, but again, they don't do exactly what they would be, what the race is gonna require, but we get close or as close as we can.

I always like it, secretly like it as a coach when those workouts go poorly for my athletes. Because then they have to fight and deal with the demons of it, and yet they've still gotten the physiological benefit versus sometimes when it goes really smoothly, they get a little bit overconfident.

And so that's a secret. How many times an athlete has said to me, there's, if they finished a key race prep, there's absolutely no way I can run 26.2 miles at the goal pace that you set for me. And I say, calm down, you weren't supposed to do it today. You're gonna do it on race day. And then almost invariably, they get extremely close to that. And they're almost always shocked at how much that kind of preparation makes a huge difference. Because we don't, evolutionarily, we were designed to run exceedingly long distances at a variety of different paces. But we have forgotten that. And we've also forgotten the kind of pain that is associated with marathoning. And any person that moves from a 5K or a 10K that moves up to the marathon, we see this at the elite level all the time. They will tell you that they were, no matter how many times people told them what to expect and how it was gonna turn out, it was something completely different. No matter how they visualized what that pain and suffering was gonna be. And so it's really important to have gone through 20 plus miles at these kinds of paces and this kind of work to be really ready for what that race is gonna ask of you.

So there you go. That was our final thought. If you're doing a half marathon on a marathon, think about incorporating some raised pace work into some of those long runs. And if you're in town, come check us out. Thank you for joining us on our maiden voyage of the Running Rogue podcast. This is Chris and Steve again. If you're in Austin, you can find more about us at roguerunning.com or on Facebook, forward slash rogue running, Twitter and Instagram at Rogue Running. Come find us, look us up and come say hi. We'd love to see you, love to have you join our community. If you're not in Austin, check us out anyway and or listen to us from afar as we continue on this podcast journey. Thanks everybody for listening. We'll catch you next time. See you next time.