Hey everybody, it is episode 58 of the Running Rogue Podcast. This is Chris coming at you from Rogue Running in Austin, Texas. Steve is here with me. Hey Steve.

Hello everyone.

We are coming at you on a Thursday after Houston Marathon Weekend, and so we're going to actually start by chatting about some Houston results. Before we get there quickly though, just to give you a preview on our topic for today, we're going to be talking about two very important parts of the marathon or half marathon training cycle, which is the taper phase and also the post race recovery phase, talking to you about how to bounce back from a marathon or half and then hopefully get back into your next cycle. So that'll be our main topic for today, but as we always do, we'll start with some intro things. So leading off with Houston, we had a big day for rogues there overall.

Yes, we did.

It was picture perfect half marathon or marathon weather. I don't think you could ask for better weather, maybe slightly on the cool side, but that's way better than warm. And it was about mid 30s at the start, sunny day, relatively no wind, and it warmed up into the 40s by the finish, but absolutely just perfect, dry as well, no humidity. Absolutely perfect. And a lot of PRs from Rogues out there. So shout out to the Rogues and to the Austinites that kick some major ass at Houston. One of those was me, Steve.

Yes, we did.

We talked about it at least a little bit on the main podcast. Our podcast training group got a full debrief from you and I beforehand on the race plan. So that group at least knows a little bit more about our plan going in. But I was able to get that marathon PR by 12 very precious seconds.

Yes.

Which was, I mean, basically our plan was kind of right at that edge. So it wasn't like we were looking for a big, much bigger result than that. But I would have been happy with a second PR if I ran a good race.

That's good because you didn't get it by much more than that. You had a super, super secret goal, which wasn't really super, super secret, but you did have a goal of getting under 245 if it was there. But you were going into the race, you and I had talked about how you knew it was going to be that tight. It wasn't like you were wondering if it was going to be a three-minute window. You knew you had a very tight window.

Yeah. Well, and as I told you that the podcast group heard, I thought maybe I was in 246 or 247 shape that 245 was going to be a tough thing for me given where I was fitness-wise. And maybe there was going to be more there, who knows.

You never know until you get in the middle of it.

But there was not more there for me. It was a beautifully run race, but it definitely was tough. And it's interesting.

It looked like it helped to have a little help at the end.

For sure. Yeah, I mean, I had you guys cheering on the course, lots of rogues cheering, plus a teammate jumped in for the final six miles, which helped just give you a reference point.

Because at that point, you're not trusting.

It's hard to buy myself and it's hard to trust your own feelings. And it was one of these days. It's interesting. This is my 16th marathon finish. It's interesting how every single one just plays out a little bit differently. You never can count on it going a certain way necessarily. My last marathon PR four years ago at the Bryan College Station Marathon, I fell terrible for eight miles and then great for the final 18. This time, I felt great really through the first 14 or so. You saw me at I think 11 and a half or just before 12. And I had a little group there. I was running with Bryan Fagan who runs with us. And there was another woman with us, Sarah, who was trying to get her trials qualifier. And then this kid, Adam, who had a Carnegie Mellon singlet on.

Yeah, he was in a lot of pictures with you.

Yeah. And we were together really that group. We were together for probably six until 12 or so. Just rolling together, Jay was with us until about 10 until he started moving on. But it was interesting because we hit the 12-mile mark, and that's the point where you kind of go up and over this big overpass there on West Park in Houston, which is really the biggest hill of the race. And, you know, I was feeling good, super smooth. We go up and over that hill, and then suddenly there's just two of us. You know, I was looking at the shadows because the sun was behind us. I only saw two shadows, so it was me and the Carnegie Mellon kid, Adam, were left. It's Brian, and that girl just disappeared on that one climb. And then about a half mile later, the kid just takes off. Like, just before we hit the halfway point, he just goes. And I'm like, OK, well, here I am. And I was suddenly by myself.

So low.

Yeah, I was feeling great. I was like cruising. I was like, we got to pack. This is awesome. Feeling good. And then all of a sudden I was by myself. And that was a point in the race where we had this little out and back. So we went out to just past 13 and then you do a U-turn and then come back and go under this other underpass to get to the other side of the Galleria area. And suddenly I was by myself. We flipped around and I was also into a slight headwind coming back. And so suddenly, like, I went from feeling like smooth and having a perfect feeling of the pace to suddenly being like, oh, no, oh, shit. Here we go. You know, I was kind of by myself and kind of struggling to find a new rhythm at that point because heading back to the east, we hit some headwind, and then going north through the Galleria, we were also facing some headwinds, probably the stiffest of the race. Nothing crazy, but just enough to throw you off a little bit. And so I remember at 14, seeing a little slower split on my watch and thinking, OK, here we go, you know. And about 16, I started to really feel it in my legs, you know, more so than I would have wanted at that point. You know, I was kind of hoping to cruise for 20 and then close for 6, but I started to feel it at 16 or so to the point where I had to make a decision to start putting more into it than I maybe wanted to at 16, kind of using some of that close, you know, mojo to just maintain pace at 16. And I remember thinking in my head, literally, the thought was like, okay, well, this is going to be the toughest 10 miles I've ever run, because, you know, this is a little too hard now. And so I started putting a little more into it to press and maintain that pace. And my splits, if you look at them, are super consistent, except for mile 25. But I had to put more work into it.

But it belies the work that you had to do.

Yeah, I started putting more work into it at 16 just to maintain. And each mile from there to the finish, I had to put a little bit more into it just to hold what I wanted to do. But I knew I was seeing my kids at 18 because they were there on the course. So that was a little milestone. And then I knew James would jump in at 20. So that was a milestone.

Yeah, at 19, you gave me the death stare. You gave me the... I saw you saw me, but I'm not sure I got... It was hard to tell. I could see that you were steeled for the endeavor ahead and that you were going to do everything you possibly had. But there was no waving or smiling. It was just locked and loaded. And I want to remind our listeners, you and I have talked many times in our discussions in the marathon about not expecting to feel a certain way. I think it's really important that our listeners hear what you just said there about how you had hoped that you would be 20, and it would be easier by the time you got there. But it wasn't your expectation, right? And so you were prepared for the, oh, snap, I've got to do more work for longer than I'd hoped. But this is what I signed up for, and I'm ready to do it. And all it's distressing, and it's frustrating, and it isn't a confidence boost, that for folks who decide that it's got to be a certain way, and that it's not going to hurt till they decide it's going to hurt in their pre-race plan, if they're not resilient enough to know that they need to troubleshoot, do the problem solving, and think through what could happen out on the course and be prepared for that, then that negative feedback loop becomes very problematic, and it's harder and harder to get done what needs to get done. And tell folks what you were kind of thinking about when you started to know kind of, oh, shit, and where did your mind go and what was going on there? Not necessarily as a, this is how to do it, but more along the lines of, we've been working on this podcast to talk about mental training and doing these things. What happened in the battle, in the moment of battle?

So there were two things mentally I was processing to stay in the game. One was my main mantra for this race, which was my athletes, my team, The Morning Show. That was, for me, the mantra was, do it for The Morning Show, because I wanted to inspire them. And literally I had practiced in some of my workouts and final long runs where we did closes and stuff, visualizing the faces of my athletes in their states of setting goals and finishing strong. Because I've witnessed it, I've also imagined it through the tracking screens. And so I thought about them, and I thought about them watching me through the tracking on this race, and how I not just wanted to do it for them, but I had to do it for them. So it was like, I didn't have a choice but to go, just suffer and do what I needed to do. So that was part of it. The other thing I kept reflecting on, as I told you after the race, was it's now or never. That became a sort of a secondary mantra, because I was looking around at this beautiful day, perfect temperatures, gloves on, exactly how I want to be racing a marathon and sun out.

You had a real reason for those half-tights.

Yeah, a real reason for the half-tights. I was like, it's now or never. I can't let this opportunity be wasted. You don't get many days like that. So that was another thing I kept thinking about. And then beyond that, it's all the things I typically teach, which is stay relaxed. I was doing a lot of... Houston, fortunately, has a lot of straightaways, not a lot of turns where you can just... I was literally closing my eyes and visualizing those faces as I described and just trying to relax the body, keep the arms and legs as fluid as I could, even though they were starting to get tight. So those were the things that were going through my mind. And I knew if I got to James, that would give me somebody kind of a reference point, because at that point, I was running alone or catching people that were slowing down, so there was no good reference points on the course. And then it was, all right, just a little bit more every mile to try to get it done. And as James would say, he's like, I've never witnessed child labor, but you sounded like you were having a baby back there. Because I was grunting and breathing loud, and it wasn't pretty, but having witnessed labor, it certainly wasn't that bad. But I was definitely digging into the well and going deep. And I had one mile, mile 25, that has kind of an underpass and a little uphill climb out of it that's pretty steady to the end of that mile. And I hit a 625 split there, mile 25, and I saw my watch and I thought, if I do that again, I'm not going to get it.

Right, you knew how tight you were. So your math skills, you were able to still do enough of that math to know.

Yeah, and they had a clock there with the gun time on it, so I knew it was going to be close, and that I didn't have any window for error, so just started pressing from that final mile point. And the last thing I had done before I went to bed the night before was count the street lights in downtown Houston from, because you kind of cross from west to east to the convention center across all of downtown. And so I counted the street lights that we would go through on Lamar crossing downtown, and there were 11 of them. So I knew if I could get to that 11th street light and count down, I could make it. And so I started my countdown there and was pressing basically at every street light to try to get to that finish line. And then when I saw the finishing clock, I could see it ticking towards my PR, and as I went under it, it hit literally exactly my PR.

Wow.

Which means, which I knew meant I got it. I had a buffer because it was, you know, I knew it was at least 5 to 10 seconds. It ended up being 12, you know, to my chip. So yeah, I got it. And obviously I was super relieved. But more than anything, just happy that I did it for my team and also that I know I left everything out there. There was not more time for me that day, given my fitness, given how I felt at the end. And so, you know, that's what you want from a race.

Sweet revenge on the 10-miler.

Right.

Sweet revenge.

Yeah, it's crazy because that race, I look back, I averaged 617 per mile. And this marathon, I averaged 619. It's crazy. So just two seconds slower over two and a half times the distance.

And for our listeners, it's not like we were doing a specific training phase for you for the 10-miler. We definitely stayed on that through the 10-miler. But I just want to demystify this. How much faster did Chris get in the window of time between the 10-miler and this? Yes, there's weather conditions. Yes, there was some training changes that we did, not to your schedule because of what happened, but because you were moving into a marathon-focused zone. But it's not the physiology that allows a person to run only two seconds slower for more than twice the distance. It's the mind, and it's the mental focus on the task at hand. And if anybody had asked you at the 10-miler, after the 10-miler, to do the math, to go, okay, you've got to run, you can only run two seconds slower to get your goal, you would have been discouraged, and you would have thought, I'm not sure that that's possible, even though you know that it is possible. But there's that feeling to sort of believe that our results, the last result we had is the only result we're going to get. And you're wise enough to continue to do the work, stay focused on the goal, and to keep believing that if it's going to come on a given day, it'll come, and you get there. And yes, the weather conditions were terrible at the 10-miler, and the course was way tougher, and there's other pieces there. But the vast, the biggest part of that equation, in my opinion as your coach watching you, is you showed up, the game day were better conditions for you, and you brought it, and you were mentally prepared for the thing that was going to get thrown at you, and you weren't mentally prepared to deal with all of the challenges that showed up at the 10-miler. Some of them were physiological, but once you go down that poop shoot, down the tube that's going terrible, it makes it really difficult to pull out and get the result that you want. So I just want our listeners to hear that, those marathoners to listen and say, this is why apples, we're not going apples to apples, apples and oranges when we talk about race distances.

Yeah, and the other thing too, just to take away from me and all of this, 20 months ago was the last time I towed a marathon starting line trying to PR. I think I was fitter then, probably 242 to 243 shape, and I ended up walking the last four miles of Boston and that kicked off a series of things that we've talked about on here from injuries to broken elbow and elbow surgery. And literally, it wasn't until this fall that I started to see semblances of that old self again. And there were times in that where, you know, maybe fleeting, but I thought, gosh, why am I doing this? You know, like, this is stupid. Let's just quit seeking these better times and be happy with the run, you know? But, you know, I just... Every time, you just keep movi... You just got to keep moving forward. You know, it's like every little obstacle, and you might have a bunch of them, and I have people in my groups that I've coached that have had more obstacles than I have had, and they keep moving forward, and you just got to keep moving forward. And, you know, November, that race in November was one of those obstacles where you could have... I could have let it defeat me or say, look, you know, or get into a negative space, but, you know, you put it behind you and just keep moving forward, and if you keep moving forward, then good things come. So that's one lesson for me, from me, and also from me over the last 20 months of work. But super happy. Thanks to you, Coach Steve. Thanks to all the podcasts. I had people from the podcast. Wish me luck and or congratulations, which I really appreciate. Lots of Rogues out on the course as well, both teammates and Rogues I coach, and Rogues that just train with us. So thanks to you guys for cheering. And also kudos to the morning show athletes that got it done for my group. I think I had, of those that were seeking a PR, all but one of them was able to achieve it on that day. So it was a good day for a lot of my athletes as well as other Rogue athletes. So congrats to those that got it done. Big day. And for Team Rogue, a lot of good Team Rogue results as well.

Yes, we did.

Now, that's that. Let's talk about the Elite Race for a second. We had, as we had predicted, made some predictions on the last episode that got released last Monday. We'll start with where we started there, which was the women's half. We were predicting Huddle vs. Hesse and whether or not the American record would go down. You and I both predicted Huddle would get it done, and she did in Flying Colors, smashing the previous record by nine seconds. I don't know if you saw her finish. I know she struggled over the last 7K, but I saw a video of her finish, and she looked like a bulldozer flying through the line. I mean, she got a kick in the final 100.

She found it.

She knew it was close, so she kind of kicked hard in the final 100, and man, it was a nice, strong finish for her.

She did it before, so she didn't want to have that happen again.

So kudos to Molly Huddle, new American record holder in 107.25.

Yeah, we predicted, we both thought Molly was going to win, and we both thought she would get the record, but we did think that Jordan would be closer. We thought Jordan would... It played out the way we said, too, that we thought Molly would go with the lead pack to make sure she got done, wouldn't need to get done, and we didn't know if Jordan would do that or not, and that we were correct with. But they came by me at five miles, and I don't know, I wasn't counting exactly, but it was 45 seconds, maybe even a minute between them. And maybe when you're standing there on the sidelines, and it's chilly and cold, and you just got out of a warm car for the first time, time seems to move much more slowly. So it could have been only 30 seconds, I don't know, but it was like Jordan's not making that up unless people die. And Jordan ran that race, she had some guys to run with, but I mean, she was running solo, then she was another 30 seconds ahead of the next group of people. She kind of ran all by herself out there.

Yeah, similar to last year, she ended up two seconds faster than her time last year in Houston. Still a good result for her. And we found out in the post race interview that they kind of decided to just let that race go. That the focus was really on having a good tempo, effort, and then just kickstarting her Boston training versus really trying to go too much to the well. So they kind of let Molly take it, and Molly did.

Yeah, I love that. I'm sure they didn't use the word, we let Molly take it. I'm sure those were your words. But, you know, I don't care. Like, Molly killed it. So ultimately, you know, the question can be, we can still say, you know, it's so funny, the way the cat and mouse game goes with these things. And you can say whatever you want, but that would have been a new space for Jordan to be that much faster at that early in the race. And how would she have responded? And it seems pretty painfully obvious that, well, that Jordan is in more marathon shape than she is in half. And, you know, we'll talk about this in a little bit, Chris, but is Molly in better half shape than Marathon, and is there enough time to get where she needs to be?

Right.

Well, we're going to talk about that in a little bit, but it's just the cat and mouse game that goes on afterwards, in my opinion, and before, really has nothing to do with what happens when the gun goes off and before they come across the finish line. And that's what we should really judge most of what's going on here.

Fair enough. Because you're right, you know, there's a lot of talk. But it was clear that Huddle was that class above. What's crazy is she finished seventh in the race. So super stacked field, and she got thrown out the back.

Yep, for sure.

About 15K or so into that race. But kudos to her for going for it. And she said afterwards that, hey, she wanted to see what she was capable of going with those women, knowing she was in a little bit over her head. And she found out that she was in over her head for sure, but still got the American record and finished strong and got the 10 mile and 20K American record along the way. So, props to Molly Huddle.

But man, the women's half marathon, it is just, when we see these times, I'm looking to see, I don't even, you know, I know some of the names are similar to the names we talked about in 2017 who had, you know, run years best, world's best, things like that. I still don't really know who these women are. And it's shocking because I know who are the best in the world, even all the way back to the top 15 or 20 in the world in the 5K and the 10K, and I definitely know the top 15 or 20 in the top of the world in the half, in the marathon. But in the half, it's just like you don't really know. And it's super exciting to me when I think about what could be coming down the pipe when it comes to the marathon long term. To be the best in the world, our Americans are going to have to get better and better and better because what we're seeing is Molly Huddle is a minute behind the best in the world at the half when she was in half training block.

Yeah, and Jordan was two minutes behind in marathon block. So it is interesting. The other result on the American side, third overall American, was Becky Waite in a minute PR just over 110.

She looked great.

She said she was doing the race without a watch because her coach was trying to get her to feel more, which we've talked about. But she said she had a super smooth race afterwards, not really worrying about obviously how she was pacing it, but just trying to have a good strong result. Ended up with a minute PR and a really good result for her. Kudos to Becky Waite, Rice graduate, Houston local.

One of the cool things about Becky is now you're seeing what it's always a tough transition when an athlete leaves a coach that they've worked with for so many years. And Becky's been worked with coach Jim Bevin basically for 10 plus years. So that's a long time. And when you make a transition, there's always a challenge. Not only did she go changing coaches, but she moved from basically sea level to 6, 000 feet and is training at upwards of 8, 000 feet on occasion as she's moved to Boulder. And it just takes a while for bodies to adapt. But I'll tell you, when she came running by at five miles, she looked as good or better than I've seen her in a long, long time. So that roots running group is working for her. It seems to be a really good match. And she's running really well. I'm really excited about what more we can see from Becky. I think this was a really big coming out party for her. And hopefully it's a sign of more great things to come.

Yeah, and she's run under 230 for the marathon. Hasn't had the result since her debut that she would like. But hopefully with this new group and a little altitude training, we'll see her competing for the trials. I mean, I think given what you described how she looked and how she looked in the post-race interview, it seemed to me that she left some time on the table in Houston.

I mean, Becky is a tiny person, you know, and she's not... But she looked stronger, more muscular, and more... It just looked... sometimes she gets a little lean, and it's like her power gets lost a little bit there. And she looked strong and powerful. And as I said, I've seen her throughout her career. I recruited her to come to the University of Texas. Unfortunately, she chose race over Texas. But I've been a big Becky Wade fan for a long time, and I've watched her run all these years, and she looked as good or better than I've seen her ever. So really excited about that for her.

So that's a name to watch for. On the men's side, this was one and kind of a surprise. Jake Robertson, the New Zealander, now living in Kenya. For those that don't know, Jake and his twin brother Zane moved to Kenya as high schoolers to basically train in Kenya. They said, look, we want to train with the best in the world if we're going to be the best in the world. And now they're starting to compete with the best in the world. And Jake proved by beating just absolutely stacked men's field with including second place in Berlin Marathon, Adola. You know, the time wasn't super fast, but they went out a little slow.

They did. It was hugely pumped, bunched pack when they came by.

60.01 was his final time, but he finished really strongly and beat some serious resumes on the men's side.

Signature win for him. Signature win.

He was dancing at the finish.

Yeah, it was really cool. I did.

It was cool to see him excited. So it's interesting. He and his brother, those are two New Zealand born athletes to watch that will be eventually moving up to the marathon and potentially making waves there. First American, you got it right, Sam Jalanga and a PR.

Yep. Something's going on there. They're running well there.

Kind of mid hour, post hour, mid one hour and 30 something seconds, I believe it was. So nice work for him. A lot of fast times behind that, nothing super, I guess they're super jumped out at me. Luke Piscadra kind of had a not good day, but he admitted in his post race interview that he basically didn't listen to his coach, his new coach. He went out too fast. And his coach had told him not to go with that lead group, but I guess they were just, they were a little bit slower than he thought. And he thought, well, if I just catch on to the back, maybe something magical will happen and it didn't, he paid for it at the end. But other than that, some decent American results. Noah Terati was up there in, I think, just under 102. Brooks Hanson's had a couple of athletes in the mix, just over 102. So a fast day for the Americans. And on the Marathon side, I don't know, there's much to talk about there. Basically the Ethiopian athletes just dominated. Yeah, it was nothing to really mention there. But a good day overall in Houston. Now, we have to ask this question before we go into our main topic, which is all four of the Boston American favorites on the women's side race this weekend. We had Jordan and Molly, which we just talked about. Shalane race to 3K indoor, as we had alluded to on the last episode, won in 8.55, which is not crazy fast, but she looked smooth and won by several seconds.

She totally powered away from that group.

Completely dominated in that performance. And then Desiree Linden was running at the Edinburgh Cross Country Race where Leonard Carrere won on the men's side, the American. But Des finished something like 24th overall and was, I think, 8th American on the day.

And Molly Seydel was 3rd. 3rd overall. Yeah, 3rd overall. So it's not like it's a race that the girls up front ran super fast. I mean, Yasmin Khan won, and you and I both agree, guaranteed 100% doper. But other than that, Molly had a really strong, great day. And it was really a little disconcerting to see how far back Desi was in that race, honestly.

Yeah. So as you look at all those results, Jordan, Molly, Desiree, Shalane, which one of them gives you the most information, I'm going to say, about what might happen in April?

So this will sound really weird and counterintuitive, but I'm going to say Jordan. Mostly because I think, again, she ran around the same time that she ran last year. Similar situations, similar conditions. She and her coach now have way more intel on what a marathon does and how her body responds both to the training and the cycles that they have and to what she's going to be ready to go for at Boston, where she ran a year ago. So I look at that and say that coach-athlete relationship and those waystages, those points that they're going to be able to extrapolate and say, this happened, this happened, this happened, this happened. All those variables are now going to align much more clearly for them to look at what they can do at Boston. So if I were looking at it from that coach-athlete, I say Jordan tells me the most. Doesn't tell me she's going to beat these other people, but it tells me the most. Molly's doesn't, because Molly ran a half marathon like it was a half marathon. Jordan ran a half marathon like it was a marathon. But Molly's performance was better by far. I mean, there's no doubt about it. I'm not saying this, I'm not judging the performance level.

Right. It does make you worry that Molly's a little too fit for that end of the spectrum. And can she come back and get fit for the marathon?

Yes. And Molly has had great marathons. I think at this point in time, I would venture to say, I would be more confident in Jordan's strategy than Molly's strategy, going apples to apples. But now, Shalane's race result, I would really say, is the most interesting, because while it wasn't lights out fast, the 3K to the marathon is so much different than the half marathon to the marathon. The 3K and the half marathon are probably closer together than the marathon and the half, but it's still on that whatever it is line. Continuum. It's definitely, so it could be that that result is phenomenal, especially if she's seriously in marathon training mode, because sub-9 minutes, it's hard to turn those legs over that fast. While Desi's performance is obviously the weakest of everybody's, I would actually put the performance levels at probably Molly, Jordan, with Jordan and Shalane being almost equals, and then Desi's below it. But Desi's is the least concerning for me, because running in nasty weather conditions on cross-country course is completely different than what those other women did. Shalane's running on a 300-meter flat track, which feels like running on a real 400-meter track, in a climate-controlled weather-conditioned space. And Molly and Jordan, as we said, had perfect weather conditions. And so tough to sled for a marathoner to sled a relatively short cross-country course distance on non-firm ground. So I'm not so concerned with the time or the place, necessarily, for Desi. I'm a little bit worried about the competitiveness. So I would really want to know, how did she feel about that afterwards? If she says, right or wrong, whether she says, as putting lipstick on a pig, or if it's really real, that this went about according to plan, I wouldn't bat two eyes about what went on with Desi's race. But if she's concerned and there is concern there, there's only going to be more concern as things go on. And Desi is playing a game of catch up with all three of these ladies. There's no doubt she is fourth on that list of where we would pick them right now, I'm sure. But pretty substantially behind that. I think the three of us would look at Shalane and Molly and Jordan and say, oh my gosh, I can't wait for this race. But our hearts would really love for Desi to be in the mix and getting after it. But we're pretty sure she's behind.

It's just hard to believe she's going to have the wheels in the last 10K. I mean, you know, this race typically plays out a certain way, you know, which is, you know, it kind of moseys for a bit, you know, and then heats up a little bit in the hills, and then you got to go in the last 10K, and sometimes even less, you know, sometimes even less, two or three miles. And Shalane showed she's got the wheels for the finish in New York. And we know Molly has the skill set, you know, whether she can do it to the end of a marathon is a different question. And then we've seen Jordan do it at some level, or at least has experience with it. Having seen it in Chicago and Boston last year. So I just don't see how Des can compete with them.

And the real question is, what's the conversation been for the last couple days between Des and her coach? Because that's really the intel is there about are they, oh shit, or are they, we're okay.

Because I mean, she may have all already also into marathon training. So who knows what she's doing?

So she's running a much.

This could have been just, let's take a trip to Scotland.

I don't think Desi can work on her 10K anymore. I think she's at the age now and at the experience level now, what she really needs to be doing is, and I'm not saying not to run this race. I'm not second guessing any coach athlete decision about race selection, and I think it could very well be a perfect thing for her. But I sure hope she's in full on marathon training and that this was to get a good hard effort to do some travel, to do some other things. And there were some other boxes they were checking off that were not related, that we don't know about, where it's pretty easy for the other three to say exactly what they were planning and what they were doing and easier for us to be confident about it. But Desi's not going, she's going to have to be there with 10K to go. And currently, I'm not confident about that. Right.

The result that gives me the most information is Shalane's, because I think she's the one where I wasn't sure if she was going to be able to get her head back in the game after New York and after all the media requirements associated with that and sort of contemplating retirement, but then not choosing to do that and come back for Boston. That's a lot of stuff to go through mentally. But to see her come out and do this and it may have been for her a little bit of a OK, this is going to get me fired up kind of an effort to see her get on the starting line, race, show the speed that we know she has, win. You know, it tells me that she's in the game. And I mean, if she's in the game in Boston, it's going to be hard to beat her.

Yep, I agree.

So I'm excited about that. All right. That's plenty of preview.

Already 35 minutes in, we digress, but we have fun.

Hopefully, you guys enjoy that. But let's talk about our topic for today, which is we've talked about these two things a little bit here and there in our marathon prep discussions, but not solely and explicitly. And we actually have had people ask us to do this. So we thought we'd do it today, especially given that we've got some folks getting ready for the Austin Marathon here. Here locally, as well as, of course, other winter and spring marathons coming up or have marathons. And so let's talk about the taper first. And then we're going to talk about post race and how you get back to training after you've had a race. So about the taper first, and we'll start with the marathon since, you know, it's that word is most often associated with the marathon. And we're going to start by kind of giving you discussions about how you manage your training loads over those final weeks. But before we get there, I wanted to make just a couple of comments about the taper. One is that I've heard, I think it was actually Macmillan describe, he uses instead of the word taper, he uses the word peaking, which is he doesn't want to think about tapering because that has sort of this this imagery that you're you're kind of getting smaller, you know, somehow or more diminutive versus, you know, getting to the top of the mountain. And so he's the word peaking, which I think is a better term for it. And really, that's what you're trying to do is get sharp for race day. And and so so that's sort of point one that with this taper phase, you're really trying to find your peak. And point two is in order to find your peak, different people are going to have different needs. And for some people that might mean cutting back more than others. And so that's part of what we're going to talk about here is that part of figuring out and mastering this peaking or taper mode is practice and testing things on yourself. And so, you know, we can give you a protocol to try for your first marathon or your second or third. But ultimately, you have to think through how you're responding and reacting given different protocols as you try these races and then adjust for the next time and try to see something different. And we'll give some examples of what that can mean as we talk about it. But it's really important that you know that the taper or the peaking phase is a personal, very personal phase. And you have to learn over time as you do races what works for you.

Absolutely. And I would say, Chris, that, you know, as we as we sort of stake the outlines here, they are individualized and personalized, and they're changeable mentally and physically. And what you're really trying to do is, over the course of a marathon career, is to refine. You'll never, rarely will I, I don't think anybody, even somebody who gets a taper, what they feel is exactly right, by the time they set back up to run, this is marathon tapering, by the time they set back up to run another marathon, they're not confident that that first tape, the last tape that they did that was just so perfect is exactly the right taper. So it's a moving target on top of the fact that it's both physiological and psychological. And so, again, to reiterate Chris' point that we can give you guidelines, we can give you outlines, but we can't dial it in. And even with my individual athletes, I rarely, I try to dial it in as little as possible. I have some athletes that really want me to tell them exactly what to do every day. And I'll do that if I feel like they mentally need it. But, you know, it's a really complex, difficult conversation and one that is more nuanced and with each athlete sort of goes through different permutations even over time. So while we talk to you, we're not really going to be giving you a definitive prescription for how to do it. We're going to give you some basic guidelines and some ideas and then really try to help you hone in on the things you've done right and wrong and then help you with that.

Yeah, and some options. So we'll start with the marathon and then we'll go to the half. From a mileage standpoint or just maybe training standpoint, what do you recommend for those final, we'll say, three weeks, two to three weeks for a marathoner in terms of mileage reduction or changes to training?

So first off, what I would do is if I'm working with a marathoner and it's their first time to run a marathon, then I'm usually more aggressive with what I would call a taper from a percentage standpoint. So what I'm going to give is a basic description of a prescription I would give a first time marathoner or a second time marathoner. And this is going to be for somebody who probably runs in that 35 to 40 miles a week range. And so the percentages that I'm going to give in terms of how you would drop it, they're going to be different than somebody who runs 100 miles a week, even though the percentage is the same. It actually won't extrapolate to exactly the same. So generally, I'm a lot more aggressive with beginner marathoners, and I'll ask them to get to the point. I'll start their taper later rather than earlier, and really only give them a two-week taper, because I don't want them to feel too weird, too far out, because they don't have the experience to deal with that. But then I'll be pretty aggressive with it. So let's say that a runner, I would have them probably do 75, they run 100% of their, 100% of whatever their weekly mileage is, the third week out, the second week out, I would want them to run at about 75% of what their weekly mileage is. And then in that final week, I'd ask them to run about 50% of the weekly mileage, but really strive to run the same number of days a week for that last week, and just make the runs much shorter. And so that's what I would have prescribed for a beginner. Now for a more advanced level marathoner, what I usually prescribe for my team Rogue athletes, and what I've prescribed for my elite athletes, a little more nuanced. Again, I have people doing less than this, and some people doing more than this, but generally what I'll usually prescribe is 100%, fourth week out, drop of 15%, so they're going down to 85% for the next week. And then depending on the athlete, they'll either do another 85 or they'll go to 75, so I'll go 75 to 85% for that second to last week, and then that final week, I'll prescribe usually between 60 and 75 miles, so a little bit bigger jump in that last week, but that's really pretty flexible on how an athlete responds.

60 to 75%.

Correct. But I'm never going to go to the 50% that I would give an athlete, and I very rarely prescribe the 60%. It's usually more like 65 to 75%.

So you're keeping the miles for an experienced athlete a little bit higher. For me, for a while, I was telling my athletes percentages, and sometimes that's confusing because then they'd be like, well, percentage of what? And is it total or is it by each day? What if I'm doing seven miles? What's 75% of seven? Do I round up or down? And I was getting all these questions.

Which are all reasonable questions. Yeah, if you do it strictly math, it does get confusing.

It gets confusing. So ultimately, what I've changed my protocol to be is not percentage-based, although I think it ends up, for most people, working out to similar percentages that you described. My standard taper recommendation for a marathon is three weeks. And basically what you do is run the same number of days you always run. So that never changes even in the final week, although you might move some of those days around depending on what day your marathon is on, but you're basically running the same number of days you normally would, and starting three weeks out, you're cutting back by one mile per run per week with a minimum of three miles. So if you're normally running eight miles on a Monday for your medium-long day, then you'd run seven miles three weeks out, six miles two weeks out, and then five miles the week of. And if you're doing four on a recovery day, you would do three, three, three. Basically, with that minimum threshold, you'd still get three miles in, because there's really no point going out for less than that. So that's my marathon protocol, is basically starting three weeks out, cut back by one mile per run per week, which ends up working out to about the same math, but it's a little easier for people to follow.

Well, that's true if your athletes are running in that 50, 60 mile a week range. But when an athlete is running 100 miles a week, those numbers aren't going to jive.

Maybe not.

Probably not.

So yeah, most of my athletes are 40 to 50 if they're in marathon training.

And so I think that those numbers, that's why I can't go by a stock.

And for that more advanced athlete, the Team Rogue athlete that's doing 80 miles a week, it's easier to apply the percentages because you have bigger numbers that you're working with.

Sure.

So anyway, but that's my standard marathon recommendation, but it is important to recognize that, and some of my athletes that I've worked with for a long time, if they do a two-week taper, then generally I follow the same rule, but just for two weeks. So it's like one mile per run per week, but only for two weeks, and that third week out is 100% of normal. And so it basically works the same way, but just depends on when you start cutting back. Now, what about, and again, still talking marathons, what about quality? How do you think we advise people to kind of flex or manage their quality work in those final few weeks?

Well, I'm probably the most consistent thing in my entire training protocols, from top to bottom, is my marathon taper last three weeks. It hasn't changed in two to three years, and Chris can attest, everything's always changing in my system. I'm always doing a little bit of something, a lot of the same, we do a lot of the same workouts, but I'm always adding a little wrinkle, changing where we're doing the workout, changing the paces, doing other things, because I'm trying to make sure that we're always hitting, we're always getting some kind of physiological adaptation, and you have to change things to get those physiological adaptations. But I really say really consistent with what I do with the last three weeks with the marathon training prep. So I have a key workout I do basically five to six days out on a Tuesday prior to the race. That workout is almost, that's changed a little bit, but basically it's a couple of repeats of five miles between two and four repeats of five minutes, excuse me, of five minutes, not five miles. That was a slip. And then it'll start at MGP, and those minutes will, they'll cut in the number of reps down to their half marathon pace, but I don't let them go any faster than a half marathon pace. Ten days out, which is on a Thursday. I've done this perennially and traditionally, and I'll continue to do it, is a 10K hard quality session. Ten days out. And then they're usually going easy on the Tuesday prior to that, because we will have done some kind of close on the Saturday three weeks out from their race. And so those things are really pretty standard in my system, and I don't change them because I haven't seen any need to do so. And because my athletes do get squirrely when they taper. And so there's something that comes with things staying the same, that's really important for them to get in the game. And now my athletes have come to expect that 10K workout and to actually relish it and to look at it as not an indicator, but as a key check. Here we go. And their body starts to move into that peaking mode and that peaking phase. I find, initially when I first started doing that, it was just to make sure everybody got some work in and make sure that it was hard enough work so they didn't get too soft before the race. But now it's turned into something completely different, and it's really been a great indicator thing, and I've done it consistently.

And it's important to note that it takes about 10 days for fitness adaptation from a workout. So anything you're doing 10 days in towards the race isn't helping you necessarily from a fitness standpoint. So that last 2 or 3 by 5 minute workout you have us do on Tuesday is really just to keep us sane.

It's mental massage and physical massage. So it's massaging you mentally to hopefully feel easy. It's not long enough to make it too, too hard, but usually even somebody feeling really poopy going into that workout from whatever reasons based on their taper, they're usually much better after they get done with it. And we know we're moving a little bit faster than race pace, and they're getting ample recovery, recuperation from that. The recovery for that is whatever they need to get ready for the next one, but it's usually about five minutes. So it's kind of five minutes on, five minutes off, five minutes, five minutes on.

My last two workouts are always the same as well. They're very consistent. And usually two weeks out, I have my group do two or three times two miles at marathon pace. And then the last week, the workout is always, or typically is 10 times 400, starting at half marathon pace, working down to 5K with plenty of rest, usually 60 to 90 seconds. So it's, again, I call that my sanity workout. It's just to get the legs moving. I don't like them doing marathon pace in that last week because if it feels wonky because they're in taper madness mode, I don't want them to get discouraged. So we usually do that on track and it's easy and quick and just helps them feel sharp and confident. So those are my kind of final two pieces of the puzzle. But really, as Bill Bowerman used to say, the hay is in the barn by those final two weeks. So it's more important, whatever workout you choose, that they're workouts that make you feel sharp and confident.

Yeah, and Chris, again, we're going to remind everyone that we're talking right now about a marathon taper. And marathon tapers are usually very much command performances. And a command performance for a single race, whereas somebody who's maybe running a half marathon or a 5K or a 10K, they've run a couple of 5Ks and 10Ks as close to two weeks prior to their actual command performance race. And we really don't have that many races going on in the marathon, or we can't control exactly where all those races go. So we're really trying to make sure that we hone in on a few key things that we think we need psychologically. But I just thought of something, Chris. We didn't really tell our listeners why you even do The Taper, did we?

No, that's sort of an assumption.

I just thought of this because I'm currently in a verbal wrestling match with two or three of my athletes that I coach at Team Rogue who are still relatively new to the marathon, very talented and are improving greatly and have big, big goals. But they go crazy in The Taper, mostly because they weren't collegiate athletes or they didn't run for many, many years, so they don't know that that's sort of a normal state of affairs no matter what as you're prepping for a race. So I think it might be good for our listeners. I told them these are the reasons why they're tapering, and it's twofold. The first one and the most important one, really, is that you need to recover, recuperate and recover, from the hard loads that have come on. And for most people on a marathon program, the hardest weeks of training have come between eight weeks and three weeks out from that command performance race. And there are really some pretty long and hard workouts, and the body needs to recuperate and recover from those hard sessions to get the full adaptation and the full benefit. They have to have the super compensatory response that's necessary to have those quality workouts and that hard work to pay its dividends late at the end of the cycle. So it's essential for recuperation and recovery. I say that to my athletes, especially those who are scientifically minded because they can wrap their head around it. The second reason I do it, especially for people who are looking for command performance races, and some of the athletes I'm talking about, they're looking a couple of years down the line, Chris, for what their command performance is going to be. And I need to get them ready for the mind fuck that goes on in the last three weeks prior to a big race. And as they get closer and closer to their very biggest race, it's only going to get harder and harder to control the variables that are going on externally and internally for them. And so what I'm trying to do is run some test runs before big races to see how they best deal with what's going on. So some athletes, they might be a bigger taper. And I've got athletes that I already have been coaching for four or five years who we do a much more aggressive taper. And we're dialed in and we know what's going on, and they're super confident when they go into the last two to three weeks of the race. I don't even have to talk to them about it. You're one of them. I don't even talk to you about the last taper. We don't talk about it. You know what works for you. You're comfortable and confident that you make the hyper adjustments that you need to make, and you roll with it. If you have questions, you ask me, you get them resolved, we carry on. That's how it works for them. But for some of these other athletes newer to me and who are trying to have these big command performances, I got to figure this out. I don't have that many more races before they have this big, big one. And we've got to try to figure out what makes them calm, cool, and collected going in. And so what we're doing is test running this taper or peak process for the big, big, long-term command performance race. So many of our listeners can also look at this as not, did you get a... It's really not what did you get on the grade. It's a lot more pass-fail, Chris, as we've talked about in some certain ways, getting it as close to right as we can. So we can have the most calm, cool, and collected athletes later in rate as they get to that final phase before the race. So that's really why I taper. Do you have anything else you think that's important for the whys of that?

No, I think you covered it. I mean, it's basically a part of that macro stress rest process that we do in training. You're stressing and resting within a week to get from long run to quality run to, you know, quality to long run again to quality, so that, you know, you can actually perform when you need to perform to do the real work. You have recovery days, et cetera. But then also within a macro cycle, you need those recovery blocks to be ready to roll when it matters. And in this case, it's the real reason that you're doing it. So you just need a little bit of time to make sure that you're sharp and ready to roll and the body's rested and fully ready to give everything on that one day. So that's what peeking is about. Now, we've talked about the full. It's not often people talk about tapering for a half, but what do you recommend there from a mileage standpoint?

So the final three weeks would look pretty similar in terms of the workouts that we would do, you know? They would be, but they might be a little bit more event focused, and that 10K workout might be a little more aggressive, so I might write a harder 10K workout for a half marathoner than I would necessarily for. So I can write a 10K workout in a myriad of different ways, giving different recoveries and different lengths of intervals and different recovery times to try to optimize the feel that I think they're going to need to have going into it. I want them to have a good, hard effort because they'll get fully recovered in 10 days, and hopefully it will make that race feel more comfortable and more comfortable. From a volume perspective, if it's a command performance race, I'll probably follow a very similar taper schedule. But they're... because they'll probably still do a 14 to 16-mile long run with a clothes on that three weeks out. So I would probably keep things really pretty close to normal. I would just change what those quality workouts might look like. And that last Tuesday workout wouldn't have any MGP in it. It would be more along the lines of going a half marathon and accelerating a little bit. And that might be a time where, depending on my athlete, I might switch to the workout that you did, where you do ten quarters with ample recovery, cutting down, that all I'm doing is just massaging the energy systems, massaging the muscles, getting them ready to where they're going to be so they can have that great race. Depending on the athlete, if they don't want to get on the roads, I might do that with them.

Yeah, I'm similar. I don't typically advise an explicit taper for a half marathoner, typically because their longest run is going to be the week before. Obviously, we're tapering the long run a little bit, so usually a week out, I'm telling people to do anywhere from typically 8 to 10 miles the week before, the Saturday before, but some people I might even say 6. So obviously, we're managing that long run down, but beyond that, during the week runs, typically I don't mess with them that much, just because I want people to feel as normal as possible. And usually, at least for my group, we do our workouts on Wednesdays, we'll do that. I do that quarter workout for a half marathoner as well. The week before that, usually I'll do something fast, 5 or 10K, although that will depend on where we are in training with everybody else that's in my group. But that week of, usually the mileage is pretty much the same. If somebody asks and says, hey, on my Monday run, can I cut back a little bit? I feel like I need it or whatever it may be, I'll give them that flexibility. If they're doing 8 miles on Monday for a medium long day, and they ask about it, I'll say, hey, cut it to 6, it's not that big a deal at that point. But otherwise, I'm not worried about them doing 8 miles on a Monday before a half marathon either, if they keep it easy enough. So yeah, pretty similar. Not a lot of taper necessarily required from an overall mileage standpoint. Obviously, the long run comes down the week before, as you would expect, but pretty straightforward for the half. Now, let's talk about the other pieces of a taper. You mentioned it, that tapers can drive people crazy. We call it taper madness around here. You know, I've done plenty of marathons and half marathons where you would think after the experience that I have as a coach and athlete that, you know, it would be smooth sailing up to these races. And yeah, you get better at coping, but you still go a little bit crazy. You're cutting back a little bit on mileage, a little bit on intensity. Your mind starts to play tricks on itself as you get ready for that goal race, second-guessing every little thing you've done. And you kind of go nuts. You know, it's like I always tell my athletes in emails or at least periodically I remind them in taper mode, you're not getting slow, as you think you are. You're not getting fat, as you think you are. You know, you're gonna be okay, and you have to remind yourself of that. So part of this managing the peaking phase is just managing the mental elements. What do you recommend for staying as calm and collected as you can through taper madness?

Try to go... This is why we don't take too many more... We ask people to run the same days of the week, because what you want to do is follow a similar pattern to what you normally do so that you've got... You know where you're gonna be hanging your hat, and you're gonna know how your body should feel. Because this is the weird thing that happens in the Taper, Chris, is that people's bodies just feel strange. Some of that is just the psychosomatic effect of getting ready for a big race. Some of it is the lowering the volume, makes your legs feel heavy and sort of not poppy and fresh. And so the more thing... And those things do... Those are the key things that are happening. They're on a larger continuum, but those are the key things that are happening mentally and physically. And so I suggest try to keep things as similar as possible. I also like people to... I do suggest for folks is to look at what their work week looks like and really try to limit the amount of stress that they have in their life. I ask them to ask their family to be patient with them and to have some level of understanding for the fact that they're going to be going through a tough time, that their nerves are going to be on edge, their fuses are going to be shorter, and they're not going to be the shiny happy people that they might normally be. And then what I try to do is if I'm in the position of coaching them and I get to see them, I really try to pay attention those last two weeks. I'm probably paying attention more in the last two weeks with athletes that I'm newly coaching in a taper than I do any other time. I'm really trying to tell what's going on and how they're dealing with it. Some of them will tell me. Some of them won't. The ones who tell me, believe me, I know. Those who don't, I'm trying to intuit, are they really struggling here and they're just trying to make it all look good? One of the things I love to say is laugh, laugh, laugh. Laugh at yourself. Laugh at the people around you. If you're going to watch movies, watch the comedies. Watch the things that make you feel good. And those are the things that I try to do. Stay as much as you can in the same mode and try to stay as loose as possible.

And as a part of that, I always have to emphasize this. Do not do anything new in those final weeks. Don't start a diet. Don't start a landscaping project in your backyard. Don't go to yoga for the first time in six months.

But if you go to yoga, keep going to yoga.

If you go to yoga, stick with your routine. Just don't add to it. It's funny what people start doing when they get a little extra time because they might not be running as many miles or they might have some energy from being anxious that they want to burn off. And then just start doing stuff. It's like, don't start that home improvement project that you've been planning for three months and suddenly you've got time with it. It's like, save that for after the marathon.

Like 15 years ago, Chris, I had an athlete who was really ready to run, and it was Boston they were getting ready for. We get amazing weather snap. We get these amazing weather circumstances in late March and early April, where Austin is among the most beautiful places in the entire planet to live in. And he just decided to completely put in a new bed of garden. And he worked for like six hours. He's like, I had so much energy. This is what I did. And he showed up on the next Tuesday. He's like, my back is killing me. I don't understand why my back is killing me so bad. I'm like, what did you do? And he told me, and I'm like, oh, sweet Lord. Don't do that.

And then the other thing, I mean, the other things I tell people is really just mainly focus on the things you can control. And those things, as I would prioritize them, are sleep, hydration, and mental prep. You know, sleep is super critical in all of training, but especially in those final weeks, and especially the sort of final few nights before race night itself. You know, race night itself, you might not sleep because you're anxious, you're ready to go. You're thinking about that 4.30 a.m. wake up call or whatever it may be. But the two nights before, get to bed early. Do what you need to do to have good sleep, because that's going to make a huge difference. Hydrate well. We've talked about sort of hyper hydration in that final week in our marathon prep episode. I believe that was episode five. So stay hydrated with electrolytes. Do what you can from a mental preparation standpoint. Go back to visualization. Work through your mantras. Figure out what those are going to be for race day. Think through the course. You know, I actually had one of my athletes for Houston tell me this tip that she's started doing for her races, is she actually makes a trip ticket for the race. Turn by turn. Right, left, right, through the whole race.

What a visualization tool.

Yeah, and then gives herself little kind of mental cues at each point. And she carries it with her. You know, I was asking her if she ever looks at it, and she's like, yeah, sometimes I do just to pass the time, especially early in the race. Sometimes I don't. But I know it's there, and I know also I'm not getting lost. So, but I thought that was a really cool visualization tool. It sort of helps her visualize the race, visualize where she is in the city, learn the city, kind of get into the city, you know, that she's in.

And any listeners that are new or don't know what we do at Rogue, every single Saturday, our athletes come into Rogue, put their keys in a safe place, and then reach for their map that has a trip tick, which is a left, right, left description of where they are going for that day. So she's also doing exactly what she does every single Saturday. And it's, that's really powerful.

Puts her at ease, yeah. And, of course, from a food standpoint, keep it as normal as possible, you know. There's different science out there about cargo loading, but from the latest information that I've seen on that, if you're going to cargo load, you have to do it to the extreme. And Jeff Knight, he used to coach with us, sort of gave us this kind of cargo loading protocol. If you're going to make it effective, you got to start five days out, you got to do it to the extreme. And for most people, it's not practical. So what I generally tell athletes is just eat normally. Eat clean, eat healthily, and eat relatively normal portions. If you want to beef up the carbs and add a few more complex carbs in the final days, fine. But mainly just do things that won't mess with your stomach and eat as normally as possible in those final days. And definitely don't eat some crazy big pasta dinner the night before, unless that's what you're used to before a long run, because that's going to make you take on water, feel bloated, and possibly feel kind of heavy on race morning itself. What else for final prep, Steve?

I think that's about it. Yeah, I think that's about it. I'm sure I could come up with a dozen other things that would be in the moment if you think it through individual athletes. But I do know that one thing that's happened recently, had happened to an athlete that got ready for Houston, and she slayed her race. She had an amazing race at Houston. She got sick in the week before. And this happens a lot. It happens pretty frequently. We're in a particularly challenging health season in central Texas. We've got lots of allergies flowing around. Nearly everybody has allergies to cedar, and so sometimes you wonder, is an athlete really sick, or are they just having a sinus reaction, are they having something else? And so this athlete was definitely sick. And it happened because as you taper, sometimes your body is ready for that super compensation, and you've been holding off some things that are happening, and the body just wants to drop it on you. But if you get sick, it's not a reason to give up your goal. It's not a reason to not think you're going to be able to do what you need to do. It's an opportunity to get the bed rest that you need. This athlete actually had the ability to stay home a couple of days, had some sick days that she was able to utilize, stayed at home a couple of days, got back to the normal cycle on the Wednesday or the Thursday when she started to feel better, and then we didn't make an adjustment for her race plan because we had optimal weather conditions, a perfect scenario, but I went in with a prediction that she would run about two to three minutes slower than what we were hoping for because it's just really tough to manage being sick. And it turns out that she ended up running even better than what we were hoping for. A wide variety of reasons for that. Most of all had to do with that athlete's mental toughness and the ability to get the job done. But we didn't allow that kind of, we didn't allow the shaking of leaves to change everything. That something bad was happening to completely rewrite the entire story. We stuck to our guns. We decided to go after the race and run the race to the best of our abilities, given what we knew. But if she had been sick for two weeks and had been sick and had the flu, I would have done something different. I would have written a different plan and we would have made a different thing. But you do sometimes feel really, you can get sick and you can have some weird things happen as long as you're on it and you're taking care of your body and you're able to do the things necessary to get healthy and ready. It shouldn't be necessarily a game changer.

Or you've got sick people around you and you're just trying to stay healthy. I was in that mode of just trying to keep my kids away from me, the little germ treatises floating around. I had just gone back to school. Somebody asked me how I was doing before the race. I'm feeling pretty good. I'm just free-basing Elderberry over here. So I was on pretty much every homeopathic immune booster you could possibly take from Elderberry to Ginger to Tumeric and all of it just to try to stay healthy, to keep sane and stay healthy. But it worked for me, unfortunately. But that is a good point. But if you get in your sleep and you're eating healthy, eating clean, shit happens and you might get sick, but hopefully you can hold it off at least till race day. Now, let's talk about post-race recovery, and this is something I don't think we've spent really any time on with the podcast, but making sure that you bounce back and do it in a smart and healthy way. And we'll start with the marathon, you know, again here. What do you... and actually before we go into mileage, what do you recommend just day of or, you know, immediately after the race, what do you recommend kind of in those initial moments just to start kickstarting that recovery right away?

Well, immediately is to get fuel in your body, preferably a burger and some beer. That would be my first prescription.

Carbs and protein.

Carbs and protein and a little happy sauce to help with recuperation and recovery. But basically it's eat and drink and eat and drink. And it's not the thing that people really think about doing immediately. They're thinking and fantasizing about it in the days prior to the race. But as soon as the race is over, they're usually not feeling a little icky and not great. Usually they've had a big sugar, a bunch of sugar poured into their stomach and not much fuel in there. And so they don't feel great. If you have a really upset stomach, the first thing I would suggest is even more to drink a beer because it helps with the carbonation, helps sort of up your burp and get some of that crap out of your system. I just say eat and drink and eat and drink. I do have one trick I learned. Actually, Paul Carozza told me this so many years ago, and I don't know that Paul ever ran a marathon, but he's a pretty smart dude.

New York.

Oh, yeah, that's right. But he's a pretty smart dude. He told somebody who said that after, I think it was after their Boston, that the quads were just blown up from the downhills and they weren't used to it. He said, find a staircase or a slight, sort of a ramp of some sort that's pretty gradual, and walk backwards up it. And then walk down, and then walk backwards up it, either the staircase or the ramp, to eccentrically load those muscles that just got completely and utterly wrecked and get blood flow by doing that. And gosh, whenever I have somebody tell me they have an immediate, really negative reaction the day after, like, I am incapacitated, what can I do? I tell them to do that, and it works like magic nearly every time. In fact, I ran the Pikes Peak Marathon a number of times. And that downhill, it's 13.1 miles downhill. And it's really, really brutal on your body. And I, every year, the day, not the night of, but the next morning, I would be so hard to get out of bed, your intercostals are killing you, your abs are killing you, everything's hurting. And I would walk outside, find the staircase, and do a backwards walking up the stairs. And it was like magic, it really makes a huge difference. That's one thing that you can do. But mostly it's eat and drink and have fun.

Eat, drink, you know, and I would say, even in those initial moments, keep moving.

Oh, for sure.

That's one of the things that I've learned in my last five or so marathons is, don't, you know, if you need to sit down for a little bit to kind of gather yourself fine, but try to stay on your feet, try to keep moving. I recommend giving yourself a little walk to your car, you know, by parking a little bit away from the start, or if you're staying near the start, don't be afraid to walk to your hotel, even if it's a little bit further away, and even if it takes you forever to do it. You know, just keep moving. You know, on Sunday, I ended up probably walking, I walked about, I don't know, it was four or five blocks to my hotel, and then later that evening, we walked to dinner as a family, and it was probably three quarters of a mile there, three quarters of a mile back. So I probably got, you know, almost two miles of walking in post race. Really easy, slow, you know, nothing crazy, but as I tell my athletes all the time, movement equals blood flow equals healing. So you want to get that blood flow to those areas and start flushing out the waste. And it makes a massive difference, I think, in how you feel the next day, and then the weeks after the race. So try to keep moving. And of course, as you said, refuel. With a mix, ideally, of carbs and protein and fats. So now let's talk about rebuilding miles. What do you recommend for rebuilding miles post marathon?

My athletes think I'm a jerk and an ogre. I have a really simple thing. In the first week to ten days, it's take a few days off. Take any day off you want to take, as many as you want, up to seven days. Even up to seven if you want to. I highly suggest you walk, or you do some weight lifting, or you do your yoga, or other things. You don't necessarily have to run. But if you are going to run, no more than 30 minutes on any day. And Chris, there's two reasons for this. Number one, and most importantly, is to get the muscles recuperated and recovered. Houston, which we just ran, is an exceedingly difficult course in terms of getting recuperated from, because you didn't have much neuromuscular recruitment. So you used the same muscles almost throughout the entire race. And the whole thing is on a concrete bed. And so the roads are built in a different way in Houston than they are in Austin. And so your body is really much more beat up after that race than it is normal marathons. So I think it's really important. Now, I flex that. You did a little more today. I don't know what you did on Tuesday, but Thursday today you did a little bit more than that. And I don't get all draconian and aggressive on people. What I want to do is make sure that they both physiologically and psychologically take a break from the sport. And I know that if they're back at their practice on Tuesday or Thursday, that they are back in the game. And if they're back in the game, I'm worried that the game is going to, in terms of getting ready for the next race, that it's going to blow up on me and they're not going to be adequately mentally recuperated and that they're just jumping in either because they're super excited with the race result they had or they're super upset by the race result they had or even anything in between. Most people want to get back at it. And so what I really try to do is to keep them away from practice for as long as possible just so that they don't have that... My group is pretty competitive and they like to roll and they move fast and some days are really easy, some days are not so easy, and I'm worried that my athletes will be right back in the game, but generally I like seven days to ten days of easy 30-minute runs. But by that Saturday, which is really six days, by that time I'm usually... If they follow my prescription, I'm usually pretty loose with them and I let them run, you know, eight to ten miles, depend on where they're at and what they're doing. But the key thing is here, I had to describe this to one of my athletes yesterday, is that they need to realize that they have to detrain for a little bit in order to retrain appropriately. And they need to take a little bit of time to get off the cycle of hard days, hard and easy days easy. And they need to take some time of easy days easy in order to be fully recuperated and ready for the next big training block that's coming their way. And if they do that, then they'll stay healthy, which means they'll be able to manage and handle the next big training block. And they'll be psychologically excited and motivated and prepared for that next training block. And that's really, Chris, what I'm trying to do more than anything else, is to be ready for the next block of training and not have these bugaboos or weird things that come out of the fricking woodwork when people don't take the time and the time and the mental energy to decompress, relax, recuperate, and get back at it.

Then what about after 10 days? What do you say?

Then we just do a gradual, basic comeback. So it would usually be somebody can go half their marathon, half of their normal weekly volume in the second week, and then usually what I'll say is go from half to 75% to 100%. And you can repeat, but this is key, Chris, repeat any of those weeks for as long as you need to till you feel better. So if you do 50% of your week so somebody's running 60 miles a week, they run 30 in that second week, if they feel like, oh, I'm not quite recovered, then do 30 again. And then next move up to 45 the next week, and if you feel like you're not ready for that, do 45 again until you feel like you're ready to bump back up. Mostly people get back pretty quickly unless they've had a real traumatic situation in their race, but usually people are ready to handle it that way. That's pretty much how I've done it always, and it seems to work pretty well. So that's 50% the second week after a really low first week after, then 75, and then they're ready for 100, but they can repeat as many weeks as they need to. Usually by four to five weeks, nearly every one of my athletes is ready to go and ready to get after it. They will start quality workouts pretty quickly. I mean, in that second week, Chris, but I'm usually checking them, making them run a couple groups back, going slower on their paces, or doing considerably less volume. I'm always making some kind of adjustment for those folks, usually in the moment and not in a written form in their weekly workouts. But I'm usually adjusting for them.

Yeah, I mean, the key thing to remember there are two things. One is, as you said, it's about the mental break as much as it is the physical break. You've worked hard, you need the rest, mentally and physically. Secondly, even after the soreness goes away, especially after you've run a marathon, you're still damaged. Your muscles are still damaged even after the pain goes away. And so you've got to remember that, you know, once those quads start feeling better again, there's still repair work being done under the hood. And that's especially why you need to build back gradually and reintroduce quality gradually. What I tell my athletes is, you know, no runs until Wednesday at the earliest post marathon. So if they're running on Sunday, you know, take at least two days off, do some walking and take the dog out and all that stuff in between. First run can be Wednesday, and then I give them a similar protocol after that where they're kind of rebuilding mileage gradually over about a three week period, reintroducing quality no earlier than in that third week after the marathon, but always in some reduced fashion as you described. So give yourself the time mentally and physically and then rebuild patiently. And of course, most importantly, as we talk about all the time on this show, listen to your body. You have to listen to those cues. And if you're feeling more beat up than others, and there's been races where, marathons where it's taken me six or seven or eight weeks, maybe not to rebuild full volume, but to feel kind of sharp again or to feel like I'm back in the game from a training standpoint or maybe to work through even some of the tightness in the glutes and lower back and have some kind of issues that might have popped up during the race. So give yourself the time, be patient with yourself as you rebuild. It's also important to remember that fitness isn't linear. You're going to naturally come off that peak from your peak race. You're going to hit a little bit of a trough after that. And when you come back, you're going to have to rebuild. You're going to have to kind of dig the dirt off of your fitness, as I like to say.

That's great.

And that's okay. It's okay. That's a part of the process, and you will rebuild back stronger, but only if you allow yourself that time to recover. What about for a half? What do you recommend post-half?

You're ready to go much more quickly. I mean, we have a really fast but kind of brutal half here in 3M that's coming up this weekend, and I usually like people to take a week of easy running after that, but most of my athletes are ready to do, ready to jump back into full swing on the Saturday after their race, so that would be six days after. And if they want to come to workouts, I'll let them, but we try to keep the workouts a little bit easier. That's if an athlete kind of went after it in that race. If my athletes run the race, but they're doing a couple of the things, either they're negative splitting in the race or they're working on some MGP work in there, or there's a variety of scenarios where they might be ready to rock and roll and back at it on a Tuesday, but that would be if it wasn't kind of a command performance race. So I always like my athletes to take that window of a week off after command performance races, no matter what, so that they're ready to go. You know, Chris, I came up with... I used to come up with a... I used to do a two-week... When I coached at the University of Texas, I had athletes that race from September 1st until basically June 1st. And so after that, we would take... I would require a three-week recovery phase in which week one they did no running. And let me tell you, for college-age girls, that is like pulling teeth. It was almost impossible to do the first year I did it. But they would then even detrain... I would let them only do 15 or 20 miles in the next week, and then there were 25 to 30 miles in the next week, regardless of their mileage. And the reason was that I wanted them to detrain a little bit because I needed that big recuperation and recovery. And remember, they were racing every single... nearly every weekend for some of those times, some of those weeks, and so they needed recuperation and recovery. So some of this has to do, Chris, with how much you're racing, what those races look like, and how big your command performance really is, how big a stretch it is. So that's why when we started this at the outset, right, we said it's not a guaranteed thing. You just have to kind of play it by ear and know what works for you. But the most important thing is take the mental recovery and whatever your body tells you, listen to it.

A couple other recovery items. You know, I always recommend that athletes try to schedule a massage. Not necessarily right away, but I like to do it either near the end of the first week back or early in the second week back to just flush out the muscles. There's just certain things that can be done with somebody's hands on you that you can't do on your own, even if you're doing your own foam rolling and whatever it may be. So get a massage to flush the waist if you have the opportunity. You know, certainly do some of your own foam rolling if you can to kind of flush out, especially the quads, the glutes, the hamstrings, all that stuff. But getting somebody, you know, to work on you is helpful. And then, you know, for me, you know, I go to a regular chiro visit. I see a physical therapist. And so I always schedule kind of post-marathon tune-ups with those folks as well so that they can make sure everything's still moving appropriately. So if you have a relationship with somebody, a physical therapist, a chiropractor, schedule a post-run appointment just to kind of get tuned up, even if everything feels good, because they might see some things that you're not even feeling that, you know, will keep you in alignment and get you ready to go for that next cycle. What else are we missing here, Steve?

Did you give a window on when they would do that?

Similar. You know, about to, you know, late that first week or two weeks out.

You don't want to be there on Tuesday.

Yeah, I think you want to give your body some time to settle. I think there's also some things that, you know, you won't initially feel that you might feel after seven or eight days. And so you want to give your body some time to kind of sort through the damage control, so to speak, and start to get into repair mode before you see either a massage therapist or one of those practitioners. All right, there you go. That's Taper and Post Race Recovery. If you have other tips, do share them with us. We will happily share them on the podcast, or if you have other questions, of course, send those along. You can reach me at my email, chris.roguerunning. Otherwise, this has been episode 58 of the Running Rogue podcast. Check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Instagram, Twitter, or Facebook, at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.