Hey, everybody, welcome to episode 231 of the Running Rogue Podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung, and I'm excited about today's conversation because I've got some of my favorite people in the world joining me for it. We've got the entire Rogue Expeditions team, Allison, Gabe, and Sean joining me to talk about a new book called Venture, The Rogue Expeditions Story, to tell the story of Rogue Expeditions, which started back with a trip to Morocco in 2012. Rogue Expeditions is a sister company to Rogue Running, where we provide unforgettable running adventures all over the world to nine different destinations, from Morocco to Patagonia to Ireland to Slovenia and Croatia to British Columbia, Tahoe, and Oregon. And if you haven't been on a trip, you should put it on your bucket list, pretty cool. And today we will hear directly from The Rogue Expeditions team. While they haven't been able to do trips during the pandemic, they wrote a book about The Rogue Expeditions Story, which has a lot of great storytelling about how the business was started, but also some of the cool running stories from the trips themselves. I think you'll like it. It goes on pre-sale May 1st. We'll talk about that at the end, about how you can get access to it. And of course, I'll include a link to where you can get that book in the show notes. You'll remember Allison because she is a four-time previous guest on episodes two, 23, 39 and 207. She's a three-time Olympic trials qualifier and just an all-around business and running badass. Her husband, Gabe, is her partner in crime in the business. He's a kayaker, a mountain biker, and he's the spreadsheet guru who makes all the financial things work. And then Sean is one of their guides and helps manage the operations of the business and get things done as they pull off trips. He actually has a background in producing Spartan obstacle course races in Europe. We'll hear about his story a little bit as we go. I'm going to jump into this conversation to talk about The Rogue Expeditions journey, where you get a little taste of what you will find in the book. And I think there's some interesting lessons in here, not only for business, but for life and running as well. And it's a fun conversation with these three. So we'll jump right in with Allison, Gabe and Sean. Here we go. Welcome Allison, Gabe and Sean to the Running Rogue podcast. How are you guys doing today? Start with you, Allison.

I'm good. Here in beautiful Bend, Oregon. Finally feels like springtime. We're going to hit 75 degrees today. So wearing a tank top for the first time in a year.

Nice. And you're getting some much needed space from Gabe, who's in the other room.

Yeah, I'm good. When you live and work together, you got to find that time apart.

Zoom calls in separate rooms is your safe haven.

I figured the audio is a little better.

And Sean, where are you coming to us from?

I'm home in Ireland. I'm on the farm. I'm glad to have plenty of sort of unlimited free labor time at home on my family farm. So, yeah, the pandemic sort of doesn't exist here.

They're taking full advantage of you, I'm sure. So good to have you. This is really the full-time Rogue Expeditions team. And we're here to talk about a book that Sean wrote with many stories shared by Allison and Gabe about the Rogue Expeditions story, the book called Venture, which will launch on May 1st. And early pre-orders will launch on May 1st, and you can get a copy of that soon. It's a fun read because there's so much good storytelling. Sean wrote it with narratives from Allison and Gabe, and there's just so many stories and so much fun and adventures from all the different Rogue Expeditions destinations. One of the things for me that I kind of saw in reading it, although this isn't explicitly in the structure of the book, but to sort of the parallels between succeeding in business and succeeding in running, there's some interesting overlaps there, which we'll draw out in this discussion. But I want to start with how we got here. Obviously running a running travel business during a global pandemic is a challenge that has been difficult to navigate. And it all really started just over a year ago, Allison, in the middle of your flight on the way to Morocco via Germany, and everything came to a screeching halt. So we'll start there, Allison. Just tell us how you experienced the global halt in travel that was the pandemic that suddenly shut down the business.

Yeah, I was kind of right in the middle of it. I mean, I can't, none of us can really say it was a huge shock at that time. Things were happening really quickly. The three of us had all actually just been together in Nicaragua two weeks before, I think two weeks before. Had a pretty casual goodbye. See you in Morocco in two weeks. I went home, ran the Olympic trials, and then on March 10th, I just boarded a flight to Morocco. Things were definitely escalating quickly at that point. And we had internally, we had all had a bunch of conversations about these upcoming trips and safety protocols. Hamid went and bought 20 bottles of hand sanitizer in Marrakesh because we couldn't get it in the US anymore. And I would say I was nervous about those trips, but at that point, it still seemed reasonable to expect that maybe this would be like an Italy and China issue. It was like, well, there's no COVID in Spain, there's no COVID in Morocco. Like we can get these trips and it'll be fine. Of course it wasn't fine. So yeah, I flew out on March 10th, 10th or 11th and flew to Frankfurt. And when I landed, there was a text, we have a group WhatsApp thread and Gabe had sent a link to an article saying that Trump was banning all flights from Europe starting the following day. And that's what I landed in Europe too. We also had a group, a women's retreat that I had helped with logistics for happening in Morocco that week, not a running thing separately. And so I was sort of the liaison for that from afar. And I remember I landed and I also had a bunch of texts from them asking me what was happening with the borders, if they should cancel and go home. And I was like, I just heard the news, I have no idea what's happening. Like give me a minute. So yeah, the three of us got on a phone call there in the airport and Gabe was in Colorado. Sean, you were already in Morocco and I was in Germany and kind of just realized we had to cancel the trip. We had no choice really. We didn't have any information. All of the articles just said flights from Europe banned tomorrow. We'll give more information later. And we had 15 people that were supposed to board a flight the next day to Morocco, and you have to transit through Europe to get there. So yeah, it was a mess. I mean, I was jet lagged and didn't really know what to do, but I think there was really no option. We couldn't let people fly there. I don't think I really wanted to go at that point. And be in charge of people. And so made the decision to cancel the trip, which felt insane. I was going to be trip number 80 something, and we've never canceled one, never junk, we would cancel one. And so I basically just wrote an email from the airport, told everybody the trips canceled, don't get on your flight. Give me a day or two to get home so I can email you about refunds and what we're going to do. We didn't even know what we were going to do at that point. That was just like, don't get on your flight. So did that when we booked my flight, I thought I would go to Marrakesh anyway. Figured I could go see Sean and Hamid and get some sleep and fly back a few days later. You know, and the airline attendants basically told me, like, we'll put you on a flight, but we don't know if we're going to have flights after tomorrow. So we could send you to Houston in an hour if you want to go home. Well, that's what we're going to do. So yeah, I took a 37-hour field trip to Frankfurt. Pretty much got back on that 10-hour flight back to Houston. Completely panicked the whole time, just about the business and canceling trips and everything. Yeah, that was a stressful few days. It's terrible. In the end, it worked out well because Morocco actually sealed their borders like two days later. So we were pretty close to being stuck there with a group of 15 clients for the better part of a month, I think was how long Americans got stuck in Morocco. So dodged a bullet there.

Yeah, and then trip after trip, obviously from there got canceled. We do have trips back on the calendar though, which is exciting with fingers crossed this year. We'll talk about that in a second. But amidst this massive halt and pause, Sean, you had the idea to write a book about the story of Rogue Expeditions. So tell me about that part of your pandemic experience.

Yeah, I mean, the first sort of couple of months, I would say that first hard lockdown was kind of a novelty in a way for us. I mean, yes, it was a shock and it was, you had to get over it. But on the other hand, it was like, oh, well, I guess we're not traveling anywhere for two months since you were at home in one place. And I came back Ireland and was working on the farm. And yes, we were worried about things, but you just felt so not in control about anything that you were just seeing. Let's just see how it'll play out. So, it was probably a couple of months in that I raised it to Allison and Gabe. I was like, well, this would be the time to write the book we've always talked about. If we can't do it now, then when could you? And I think I sort of, you know, you guys gave me a nod to sort of have a go at it, I think. And I just sat down one day and wrote something. And once I had probably a chapter and a half ready, sort of send it over to Allison and Gabe as a means of sort of getting some eyes on it. And I think maybe it could have died there and then, but the two of them were very open to it going forward and open to the way that I wanted to maybe write it, because it was very much about their story, I suppose, and very much about them. And if they weren't open to telling that, then it could have stopped in its tracks. But then it became a nice project because we got into a sort of a back and forth then where they started to pitch in stories and which way it could go and what direction. And bit by bit, it started to fall into place, although it probably took still another few months for it to get to a tipping point where it's like, okay, definitely can finish this. This will be a book rather than a start of something that never gets finished.

Yeah. Really good storytelling. That's to me, the real reason to read it, just really good storytelling about this whole adventure. So Gabe, let's take it back to the beginning of the adventure in 2012. Allison runs the Olympic trials in Houston, does really well there. And then you guys have a trip to Morocco planned as a celebration and a break after her big intense training cycle there. And Serendipity brings you a guy named Hamid and the rest is sort of history. I don't think I knew all the details of the story of you guys meeting him and how maybe a few small shifts in one direction or the other might have not had that first experience with him happen. So tell us the story of meeting Hamid.

Yeah, I mean, the whole trip to Morocco was sort of a spin the globe kind of moment. We weren't really sure where we wanted to go. We were both stuck in our jobs. Allison was obviously working full time with Rogue Equipment, coaching, and doing all the marketing for you guys. I was in construction, working long hours, stressful, didn't have time to really plan anything. I think we were originally looking at Portugal, decided Morocco was a little more exotic and ended up there. We had previously, I guess our previous big trip was living for a year abroad in Southeast Asia. So we were kind of used to just flying by the seat of our pants and showing up and getting a hotel room and kind of just going as the wind flows. Morocco was a little different because we only had a couple of weeks. So we really had to plan it out. And the Sahara Desert was definitely high on the priority list. During the first week, I guess, we were in Morocco. We had met up with another couple. We had rented a car and just took off on a little road trip. It was super fun. They had to fly back home. So we ended up in Orzuzat. We returned the rental car and we were sort of just kind of figuring out what the next step was. And in our hotel, I was inquiring about, you know, if there were any tour operators. And the nice lady at the desk pointed me to Hamid. And yeah, I went over there and started talking to him. And the typical spiel in Morocco is they're gonna give you a pretty hard sell. Like if they were used car salesmen in the US, like they would be rich. Those guys can, yeah, they're great salesmen. And you kind of start to shrug that off after you're in Morocco for a few days. You know what to expect. And Hameed was just different. Like he was very calm and relaxed and just very friendly. And we talked about it. He had a family camp in the Shigaga Dunes, which is kind of the main area we wanted to go to. And it was an expensive trip. We weren't really quite sure what we wanted to do. So we said, hey, we're gonna have dinner and we'll give you a call. He gave me a cell phone number and Allison and I went our separate ways. We sat down at dinner and decided, hey, we're in Morocco. We're never gonna be back in Morocco. Like, let's just do it. So I went across the plaza and found a payphone. And this was before international cell phones existed. But yeah, I put in some Deerham and gave him a call. And you know, it was like a weird connection and got disconnected. I tried again, no luck. I had no more Deerham. I was like, well, it wasn't meant to be. So I went back across the plaza, sat down. We continued our dinner. And like five minutes later, I see Hameed walking across the plaza with the response of, did you try to call me? We were both just baffled on how he knew that and how he knew where we were. We immediately had that gut feeling that this was our guy and he was hired. But turns out he had called the operator in Morocco. I guess you can do that. And found out where the call came from, called the store on the corner and said, yep, a tourist, you know, American just left the pay phone and walked across and sat at that table. And he came and got us. So we left the next morning for a three-day trip, two nights in the desert. And yeah.

It's crazy. Do you guys think about what would happen had that connection not worked?

Oh, all the time. Wherever to be there. And I remember our whole rationale for hiring him even, cause we were such diehard, like independent travelers, and it kind of killed us to hire anybody for anything. Now we know better, but at the time, that was kind of our style. And I remember we actually said to each other, like, we'll never be back in Morocco. This is a once in a lifetime thing. Like, we'll spend a little extra money and hire this guy. Little did we know.

Yeah. The rest is now history. And who knows where you'd be without that, without him tracking you down. I love that story. It also, I think, tells you what kind of guide he is. He is industrious, gets it done and can roll with the punches. I want to talk about your experience, Allison, at the desert camp, at his family's desert camp there, because the storytelling around that and hanging out around the fire in the evening with the music playing and food coming and wine flowing, to me is sort of a central kind of experience that happens in different forms in all of your trips. And it might not be in the Sahara, it could be on the island of stress, but it's a big part of it, that community element afterwards, because that reminiscing and enjoying the experience of the day is a big part of these adventures. So talk about that first experience in the desert in Morocco.

Yeah, I think, at this point in life, I think I've gotten to go spend a night in the Sahara 14 or 15 different times, and I feel like it's just as magical every single time I get to do it. And I think a lot of it, like you said, this experience can happen in a lot of ways, but you're put in this landscape that's so different, it's so far removed from anywhere you've ever been. You're totally taken away from normal life, from the outside world, and you're just there, right? But the cool thing with the Sahara and that camp is, you climb up on these dunes, some of these are almost a thousand feet tall. The sunsets, the light out there is absolute magic, but you just, since you get, when you look out over the ocean, you have that same feeling there, when you look out over those dunes. And I just remember, I felt like a kid again, like we got out there and I just remember like running up the dunes and rolling down. And I mean, I went out for hours, just like running around in the sand barefoot, so much fun. So yeah, it was just a really, really special place and just absolutely loved it. And I think we both had huge grins on our face the whole time we were out there. In that particular time, it was just the two of us plus Hamid and the guide. And I think there was a cook or two at the camp. So we were like the only guest staying there. And that was kind of cool, because I do remember like we had the campfire and all of that, but I also went in and like hung out with those guys in their tents. And I think they had the hook out and kind of got to just hang out with those guys a little different. Like they, what's really cool out there, I think is that they have just as much fun as we do. Most of those guys were born in the desert. They're from that area to them. Like that's where they want to be. You don't feel like anyone's putting on this show for you because you're just paying tourists. It's genuinely where they want to be. And I think that's a big part of the magic out there. And yeah, the wine flowing helps with the ideation, I think. Gabe and I weren't really prepared that first trip. We didn't realize how difficult it was to find alcohol outside of the city. And so we'd been traveling for two weeks. I think I made Gabe walk around a lot more towns and he was happy about trying to find some place that would sell a bottle of wine, but you just couldn't find it anywhere. And then we got back to the Sahara. And of course, those guys knew better. And I remember we had been out in the sand and came back to the camp and had pulled a few bottles of wine out that he brought. And yeah, I think everything was just so on point. There was no way not to have some kind of deep moment and great ideas out there.

And that's where the idea of the running trip to Morocco was born. So you come back home, you come back home, you pitch the idea, Ruth, here at Rogue, and suddenly you have a trip to plan.

Yeah, you know, on that whole trip, I didn't run at all those two weeks. Part of it, I was post trials, but also I didn't know if that was, if it was safe, if I could, what I could wear. Could I wear shorts? Is that super weird? So I just didn't run. Maybe we hiked a little bit, but the topic of running kind of came up around the fire with Hamid that night. And I had noticed all week that the coal country is just full of there's trails, there's mule trails, there's dirt roads, there's hardly any traffic. It's absolutely gorgeous. You have so many different landscapes and it just seemed like there would be so much opportunity for running. And it had kind of come up in conversation. And Hamid said that one line that changed everything, which was that one time he had some French tourists that wanted to go running. So he drove his car and gave him water. And I was working at Rogue. I had access to lots of runners that liked for us to give them water and make roots. And it was just kind of like, it wasn't a business idea. It was a one-off, like, bring it 10 people I coached to come back here and we could do this running thing. And again, bottle of wine or two deep around a campfire. It's kind of like a brilliant idea. And we kept insisting to Hamid and we were going to come back with runners and he did this response, ah, inshallah, inshallah, you're welcome. And he didn't believe us, but I think we actually took his business card home. I think that was how things worked back then. And yeah, emailed him when we got home and said, give us an itinerary for a running trip and rest this history pretty much.

Yeah, a year later, 22 runners, a lot of Rogue legends on that first trip, Ruth and Chuck and Nedra and Devon. I think back to the storytelling from that first group, it's pretty cool. Gabe, you're not a runner. I mean, you run, but you're not really a runner. Your main thing is kayaking, mountain biking, things that involve much more risk and sometimes pain and broken bones. What was your reaction to this idea? I don't think I've ever really talked to you about it. In terms of the running element and being a part of that, and it not necessarily being your thing, but definitely Allison's thing, what was your reaction?

You know, I mean, it's a great idea. I think Allison and I are both drawn to the adventure. For me, running is a means of exploration. It's the same reason why mountain bike, why kayak, go on rafting trips. Like I want to go see places that I can't normally see on my own. And running is faster than hiking. You can get to see a lot more. It's great exercise. I think I realized the value of running post-college. When I had less time to get out and get a crew together to go on a kayak and trip or go on a mountain bike ride. Running was just easy. Traveling, you could bring a pair of shoes and that was your adventure component. So I think Morocco fit the bill perfect for that. Clearly being in a relationship with an elite distance runner, you start running or else you don't get to spend a lot of time together. I think being at that time, Allison was not a trail runner at all. And yeah, I think that was an equal playing field for us because if it was rugged rough terrain, like we could stay with each other and she wasn't going too fast and I wasn't going too slow. So it worked out great.

And I think both of you are good at rolling with the punches. Speaking of rolling with the punches, we got to figure out how Sean fits into this story. You came a little bit later, Sean, in the Morocco story at the advent of Endurance Adventure Morocco, which was, I don't know if you describe it as more advanced, but maybe a little more rigorous trip than some of the others, with a little bit more mileage and some fun challenges along the way. But you weren't really supposed to be there, Sean, from what I understand. And suddenly, Hoseway, which was one of the partners in establishing that trip, said, hey, this guy Sean's showing up. You shouldn't meet him. He's going to be fine. He's going to help you run this trip. And there you are. So talk about you entering the picture.

Yeah, well, the endurance adventure concept was a joint venture. It came up between Rogue Expeditions and another company, Fuego y Agua, which produces ultra marathons in this event, survival run mostly in Nicaragua. And so I knew Hoseway very well. And we had been through all kinds of trials and tribulations putting on ultra marathon events. And so he trusted me, so he was ready to kind of throw me in last minute to this new trip. But I had never met Allison and Gabe. We may have been on an email thread or something, but that was probably the extent of it. So Hoseway, yeah, had to pull out, but he sort of didn't think a lot of it. He was like, I'll send Sean, that'll be fine. I also didn't think a lot of it at the time. I was like, just one more thing. And I was at a point in life where I was just doing a lot of travel, a lot of different events. I was all over the place. And so it was just one more thing added to the calendar. And I thought I'd just get there and figure it out on ground. And so it was probably, I was a little bit undercooked, I would say, going in. Allison and Gabe obviously had the connections. They had Hamid, Morocco. By that point, I mean, this was three, four years into going to Morocco. So it was tried and tested. And we had the contacts on ground, but I didn't really know any of that. But, you know, I got there. We met in Marrakesh first time and we clicked, you know, and that first trip went off in hindsight, knowing what we know now and knowing the nuances of trip planning nowadays, it's pretty amazing how well that trip went. But because we did, you know, a lot longer runs into a lot more remote places. There was no phone coverage a lot of the time. And yeah, we were kind of doing challenges on the fly. We had people carrying firewood around and making adobe bricks and all kinds of stuff. We climbed Tupacal, the highest point in Morocco, up to like 13, 000 feet with crampons and hookah shoes. Maybe that first year was actually dry enough to go up in trail running shoes. But there was a lot of stuff crammed into one week. But we pulled it off. And I think the sense coming out of that week was that we jived well, you know, myself, with Gabe and Allison. And we probably didn't really dwell on it too much because we hadn't any plans to do anything after that for another year at least. But, you know, we were on solid foundation, I think, for whatever would come afterwards. And we clicked from a personality's point of view.

I think it's pretty telling that you would basically look a 60 to 70 mile running trip in the face and just sort of shrug it off and be like, sure, let's go.

Yeah, it was just, I mean, roll with the punches is the phrase with that. You know, it was literally just get there. And I mean, I tell the story in the book about the High Atlas Trail, which was like a 30 mile section. It took us two days to cover, was marked with 300 flags by Allison and Gabe a week prior. And like there was barely a flag and I was kind of scurrying around through little villages with kind of a phone trying to pan in and out and figure out which way was which. And more chalk arrows to get people through, but you just get on with it. You just adapt and you just get through the day. And you know, we got all the runners through. They had a great time. And it definitely was an adventure because we were pushing the bounds of what we could organize, but that's the whole point. You know, that was the whole point of that trip to sort of just keep it on the edge of being an organized trip. But it went off without a hitch.

Yeah, speaking of rolling with the punches, we got to talk about the story you tell to open the book, which from at least my outside in perspective was sort of the first big oh shit moment of Rogue Expeditions. Maybe there were others, but the biggest perhaps early on was the ice getting stuck in the ice in Patagonia. So Gabe, tell us that story about getting stuck in the ice in Patagonia.

That whole day was an oh shit moment. But it all started with the ice. We had chartered a scientific research boat. They did some photo safaris and stuff. So it was a two day, two days on the boat leaving from Puto Arenas. We had picked up the clients and immediately went to the boat, which in hindsight is a terrible idea just because of flight delays, lost luggage, things like that. We would never set those logistics up that way now. So we're on the boat and we're down in the fjords. We're looking at glaciers calving, elephant seals, leopard seals, like all kinds of just cool animals, whales. And we disembark on the larger boat, the forest boat, to get on the smaller zodiacs. They're a little bit more maneuverable and you can get up into the ice that's calved off. We between that and there was a big rock outcropping, like a big smooth granite rock outcropping that we could all safely land on and take some of the whiskey and pour it over some glacier ice and toast. As we're going up through the ice on the zodiacs, we heard a loud crack, sounded like a cannon going off and we couldn't see what was happening, but we definitely heard it. And, you know, a few seconds later, we started to see the ripples of kind of the wave from the icefall. And we didn't really think a whole lot of it. And, you know, that ripple effect kind of pushed the ice up and over that big granite dome that a few of us had already landed on. So it was kind of a mad scramble to get everyone safely off those rocks. We couldn't land any more people and the zodiacs couldn't pull up to it because it was literally washing huge chunks of ice up and over it. So we kind of had to time it with the waves and get one person off at a time. Once we were safely back in the zodiacs, we quickly realized that that whole little bay had filled in with ice and we couldn't go anywhere. It's just like when you put ice cubes in a glass with cold water, they all just freeze and lock together. And the icebergs did the same thing. And we were hitting the ice with the wooden oars. And we weren't making any progress. They were trying to ram up on top of the ice with the boats to break it. That wasn't working. And we were just not really going anywhere. So they called in for reinforcements, the big boat, the forest boat. Before it became a boat down in Patagonia, it was an icebreaker. And so it had a big thick hole on it. It could push through and break the ice up. Allison and I were on the same boat with the only person from the crew that spoke English. The other group was on the other zodiac, and they had no idea what was going on. So they might have been a little bit more panicked. But yeah, the big boat came, and you knew it was a special day when you saw the entire crew and the captain out there with video recorders and cell phones taking pictures. So it was a sight for them as well. They had never seen anything like that. And they also asked us not to put that in the review.

Don't tell anyone. But you made it out safely with no injuries, no issues. But I think it's funny thinking about you trying to holler over the wind to the other boat about what was going on.

And I know that year it was sunny out, but I suggested that everyone wear their rain gear just in case, because the weather changes really quick down there. And several people in that group ignored me and wore shorts and T-shirts. Anyway, from that moment on, we mandated rain gear.

Required rain gear. The other thing about Patagonia that I remember again from my side is, is navigating, speaking of rolling with the putters, navigating currency exchange. Suddenly trying to figure out how do we, first of all, just get money down there safely and make sure that it goes to the right place so you can pay the guides and hotels and things like that. But then also just trying to price the trip so that you can mitigate currency risk as well. It became a big challenge. I know, Gabe, you're the spreadsheet guy, but that was to be a complicated jigsaw puzzle of things to figure out too.

Yeah, it was actually really fun. I enjoyed hedging currency. And in my previous life of construction, I was financial planning for $80 million construction jobs. So a running trip to Patagonia was, yeah, it was in the wheelhouse for sure. And I enjoyed it. I remember our first trip to Morocco. Hamid didn't have a bank account yet. And I think Allison and I went down there with like $25, 000 in cash. We didn't sleep very well on the plane that night.

I think me, you and Ruth each carried $10, 000 in cash on us.

And we've had some similar experiences in Patagonia. We had, you know, there was some difficulties with wire transfers and money not showing up. So rather than continue to go through that headache, we just brought the remaining balance with us down to Patagonia. And when you convert that into Chilean pesos, you end up walking out of the currency exchange place in downtown Puto Arenas with a grocery bag, brown paper bag, like full of cash. Like it's the largest grocery bag of money I've ever seen in my life. And I'm like, we're going to get mugged between here and our hotel. It all worked out fine.

Thankfully, I'm glad you thought it was fun. I know from my vantage point of like looking at bank accounts, it was nerve wracking, but you had it all under control and it did work out. I want to talk about running for a second, Allison. Obviously, every trip has a running as a central component. Kenya, though, is special in a sense that you get to go to E10, which is the training ground of all the great Kenyan marathoners, particularly. What's that? What's that place like?

Oh, man. E10 is awesome. So E10 technically is really just a little village up in the mountains in Kenya. And if you were to go there and if you removed all the runners, there's not much going on. There's a couple little shops. There's a lot of chickens. There's a lot of cows. Dirt roads. I think there's one paved road through the center of town. It's a quiet, quiet place. But you're probably out here at about 8, 400 feet there. So as far as Kenya goes, it still looks tropical in a way. It's still lush, but it is quite cold. It's actually foggy. A lot of the time, it can be pretty chilly there. Really, really good climate for training. But what you get is just thousands and thousands of runners who are there. There are foreigners. There are very few tourists. I would say our groups are probably one of the only people that come in as a tourist, so to speak. There are foreigners that go there to train, but it's mostly thousands and thousands of Kenyan runners who are trying to make it and running. And most of them are coming from surrounding villages, villages in Kenya, and running is seen as a very viable career option and a way out. And if you can get noticed, if you can get into a race, if you can get noticed enough to get into a race overseas that has prize money, that can be life-changing for a lot of those people. So it's worth it for a lot of them to pretty much give up everything, go there, and just train. So it's a very different kind of mentality than what we see running in the US where people are running for fitness or for social interaction, whatever reason it may be. It is strictly, it is very much a career path there. But it's also very different in that running, I think a lot of us tend to think of it as sort of a solo thing or kind of focused on ourselves. It's very much a group activity. And when you're in E10, you get there, a lot of people are training, everyone's kind of got their own coaches or in training plans. There are small groups. But generally speaking, there's pretty standing kind of meetups where people meet up and run. So I would say, I think when we've been there, there tends to be probably a 6 a.m., a 10 a.m., and a 4 p.m. kind of time of day where there's critical mass. And you go out there and there are just thousands and thousands of people running on these dirt roads. And you just have these rolling hills, dirt roads, trees, absolutely beautiful, no traffic, nothing to worry about. And just some of the fastest people you've ever seen in your life. And they could be running in groups of 100, 200 people, just hauling ass up a hill. And it's just kind of a lot of the Kenyan style of training, which I actually really like and I've encountered there. And also meeting Kenyans throughout my own racing and whatnot. But a lot of the kind of runs really start very, very easy. I mean, almost walking pace sometimes, very, very easy. And it just gets faster, faster, faster. And it eventually will hit a point where it's just kind of hang on as long as you can, you know, and there's people that will hang on. There's people that will drop. But yeah, everyone's kind of got this, we're all in it together mentality and people will, you know, even when we're there running, we'll have those groups come by and they'll yell at us and tell us to come join and hang on. And why are you walking or why are you okay? Like come run with us. And yeah, it's just, it's magic. I've never been anywhere like it at all. I absolutely see why it is a training, it has become kind of a training mecca because there's not anything else to do there. There's to this day, there's still really no good wifi in town. There's really no diversions. There's kind of one little beer bar that Overlook gave, I can't remember what that's called, but there's kind of that. And yeah, a couple of little shops, cafes, but otherwise people are there to train. That's all that's going on there. Eat, sleep and run.

And they're doing it together. I think we know in the Rogue community that running is only a solo sport if you let it be, if you find the community to do it with, there's plenty of people that you can surround yourself with. And I think that's obviously true there. It's also something to me that's cool on the trips, which is that running becomes that common bond that really quickly codifies the group culture on each trip. Sean, I know you've gotten the opportunity to experience that many times. Describe that, how running just so quickly brings people together from literally all over the world sometimes on these trips.

Yeah, I mean, you'll start off with 12 or 14 or 16 jet lagged strangers in a hotel lobby and everybody's shuffling around, but it only takes a couple of conversations to break the ice. And the beauty of our trips is you've at least got that common, you've got one thing in common, which is that you're all here to run, even if you've got nothing else in common, or you've inevitably got a mix of backgrounds and personalities and all the rest, but you've got running as a starting point. And so you start off with a group of very running focused conversation, I would say, at the beginning. And a lot of the time, you know, it was in some ways an inspiration for the book, but Allison and Gabe will offer their stories from previous trips. And a lot of people want to hear about how they got started and they're running, how much do we run, stuff like that. Bit by bit, the people on the trip start to give more and more of their stories. But by the end of a trip, like when you've spent a week or 10 days in Kenya or in Patagonia or somewhere, you've got your group stories then. They've become, you know, they've shared in things together, the good and the bad. There'll be running injuries and there'll be accidents and mishaps along the way. But you develop this little group bond, which is cool to be a part of because each group is unique and takes on its own dynamic and has its own story to it. But it's really cool to see a group of people come together that might only have running in common. And by the end, they have a lot in common. And many of the people from the groups stay in touch. Many of them come back together on future trips, or they go and run marathons together somewhere, they meet up for training. So there's a whole network in the book. I kind of come to describe them as the alumni, these people that kind of come through the trips and then they stick together. And there's this cool network of people through the world now, not just through Austin and not just through the US, but almost this little global fraternity of Rogue Expedition people, which is surely the neatest thing that the company has achieved. And I'm sure it wasn't in the wildest imaginations of Allison and Gabe at the beginning, but that's just how it's all played out.

That's cool. And it draws people in too. I mean, not just the groups, but themselves, but the way it draws in others. Gabe, I think about all the partners that you guys have established, Canuthia and Baruch and Tony. It's like you didn't necessarily seek these people out, even Katie and Kate, the other guys. I mean, it just kind of came together. I mean, how do you describe the serendipity of meeting the people that have become the glue that holds it all together?

Yeah, I think, you know, I don't even know how to describe it. It just happened. And it's usually, the people on our trips are good people, and most of the introductions have happened from people on our trips. You know, Canuthia was a recommendation from Amanda on our very first trip. Borut, I think, was a different, a unique story because he kind of came to us, but came to us through the Austin community. And Katie Conlin is another recommendation, I guess, through Dacia at a running store in Seattle and came to us that way. So, you know, call it chance, call it luck. I don't know, but I guess good people attract good people. And yeah, it's inspiring to be around everyone. Everyone has a really unique story. Yeah, it's been a blast to get to know everyone. I feel like we have family all over the world.

Yeah, you got to have those good people in business and in running. Going back to you, Sean, another theme that I pulled out of this is, you have to have a willingness for adventure, whether you're in the business, whether you're taking a trip, and certainly when you're scouting. They don't have grizzly bears in Ireland, from what I understand. So when you were scouting that British Columbia trip, how afraid were you of grizzlies?

I was a little puckered up on my first run or two. Yeah, I mean, it's something else. If you've never encountered a grizzly bear on two feet, you know, not separated from within a vehicle or anything, it's a unique feeling. And the scouting trip took place right in the middle of the Salmon Run. So there are hundreds and hundreds of grizzly bears in the Bella Coola Valley. There's a lot of great wilderness in BC, but Bella Coola is right in the middle of it. And Fraser, who's our contact there, he's a keen trail runner and everything else. And I sort of imagined prior to the scouting trip that he'd be coming along with me at least for one or two runs, show me the ropes, show me how to use a bear spray. But he was just too busy. And so he just sort of turf me out and I went off running. I definitely was very conscious. I definitely was shouting, hey bear, a lot. I did things that I've never done before running, which like I played music out of my phone like an obnoxious idiot. But I just had to do that just to make noise. I was on my own and never saw a person all day. So I was like, at least I'll alert these grizzly bears to the person going through the forest. But bit by bit, you do get comfortable with it. There's a skill set to running safely there. I think you do have to get some knowledge under your belt about where to run and when to run and how to run to do it safely in those scenarios. But it was definitely exhilarating the first couple of times.

It's pretty safe when the salmon are running and they have much better things to feast on, I suppose.

Exactly. You've got a river full of easy dinner or a really scared Irish dude running pretty fast the other directions, like go for the salmon.

I love the quote about distinguishing between grizzly bear and black bear. Shit.

Yeah. You got your bear bells and the grizzly bear shit. I kid you not. Every single person in the Belkula Valley, like when they see a new person come in, they're just like, OK, let's get the bear joke out. Because I was going into the stores, I mean, there's like one hardware store in town, and there's the Legion, which sort of passes for the bar up there. And I had my running pack and my bell and the running pack all the time. So they would hear me jingling in, and they'd be like, oh, look at this guy coming. Let's get the bear joke teed up. I heard that one a few times. But it's a great place. And the fact that they all are so comfortable living with grizzly bears constantly, you know, just going through their backyards is a unique thing. And that's what make BC, you know, just a fascinating place to visit. Because, yeah, in Ireland, as you point out, there's no grizzly bears, there's not really anything too wild. So it definitely, it hones your senses and gets your adventurous spirit stoked, I would say, when you know that there are those animals around you in the forest. We had one, Allison and I were doing a scouting run, I think just before the group arrived. Probably remember this, Allison, we were coming down from Turner Lake. I think I was leading and I saw a black bear cub just shoot up a tree. And then that kind of informed us. Thankfully, we were starting to learn at that point that that informed us. The mother was nearby and we backed off and it all passed off easily. But I would imagine the heart rates went up a little bit there, but it was...

I remember it vividly because I remember being so happy that you were in front. And then I would question my ability to be a running guide because I did not want to be in charge at all. I think we both had our bear spray out. What do we do now?

We were wondering with that trip whether people would be okay running. We were kind of recommending that they run in pairs or in groups. And it was people were very, very comfortable running in pairs.

They did not. They didn't need to be told twice. Oh, man. That's terrifying. But if you want to get off the beaten path and maybe see a grizzly run BC, it's for you. Allison, I want to ask you a question, which is in this journey, which now goes back to 2013 with that first trip, what's the moment where you've been most afraid or worried or scared?

Oh man, I have to think on this one for a minute.

It doesn't have to be in a place. It could be business-wise too.

Yeah, I mean, I feel like those early years, I was a constant state of afraid internally, just in terms of filling trips, getting people to sign up. Sean actually described it really accurately in the book, which is funny because we had never met at that point, but it sounds like he was sitting in the RV with Gabe and I as we would see a cancellation email come through. I mean, I'd be lying if I said those still don't stress me out, but back then that could make or break everything. We're dealing with so few clients every year, and I feel like a new trip would sell really easily. And then after that, I feel like constantly, and marketing was kind of what I handled. And I feel like just 24-7, I didn't think about anything except how are we going to get people to fill the spots on this trip. And there was just never a break, because there was always a trip that needed spots filled. And they always ended up working out, but I never really learned to trust that. It was, yeah, I feel like it was a constant just underlying stressor and worry, and I could never really relax or turn it off or take a break, because it was always just thinking about that next trip and getting people in. So I don't know if that answers the question, I would say. From a business perspective, yeah, that was always there. And it was never a matter of even early on, I don't know that we were, I don't know the moment when we mentally fully committed to it. I know the moment when Gabe left his job and we decided this is what we were going to do. But I feel like a lot of those early years, I was still working for Rogue. It was very easy to have one foot out and kind of like, okay, if it doesn't work out, it's fine, we'll do something else. But eventually it hit a point where this thing matters and it's like our child, right? We want it to succeed and we want it to do well. I do think around 2017, 2018, we definitely hit a turning point of really just people finding us and things kind of flowing. That was one of the most rewarding things ever. But a lot of those early years, yeah, constant state of what are we doing and why are we doing this? Is it going to work?

Yeah, I remember getting the updates. We need this many people to make the trip. Otherwise, we'll have to cancel. We need this many people to make money on it and so forth. I mean, stressful times, especially when it's your job, theoretically, to fill them. Gabe, were you quitting your job, your full-time, pretty high-paying construction management position? Was that your scariest moment?

I think it was pretty exciting. You know, like any new adventure, you're really excited going into it. It's maybe, you know, once you start going down that path and you've got both feet fully invested into that new adventure, is where you kind of start to think, what have I done? Yeah, it was definitely scary. I mean, that was the only thing I knew how to make money at. And it was a great career. 401k, all the great benefits, you know, easy, comfortable. Yeah, everything was planned out to kind of give that all up, not realizing that it would be, you know, two or three years before we actually made a livable wage. Looking back and, you know, had we known what we know now, would I have made that same decision? I don't know. Is it worth it now? Absolutely. Like, I could, I cannot imagine doing anything differently. But it's definitely scary. You have the highest of highs and the lowest of lows, all within a 10-minute window of a given workday of a small business owner. And I just remember, yeah, looking at bank accounts and just trying to do the balance of, you know, new trip signups to cancellations and deposits paid and all that. It was definitely stressful. Like Allison said, you know, you get two cancellations on a trip of 10 people and that can totally break your whole profit margin. But yeah, that's definitely scary. And I want to go back and say, I think the scariest moment I've seen on one of our trips was scouting with Allison in South Africa. She saw a Cobra and I had never seen her. A Cobra hooded and poised, ready to strike. And yeah, she just kept repeating over and over again, Cobra, Cobra, Cobra, Cobra.

And I was like, where, what?

And I walked right past it.

Goodness.

I think that one was scarier after it was over. Like in the moment it happened so fast. And then later in the day, thinking about how one of us actually got into it by that Cobra, like would have drastically changed that week.

That's when Allison's pace slowed down and I became the lead runner.

She implemented the bear strategy. Let somebody else go first. So Sean, you had your own Leap of Faith too, jumping from a really solid career, organizing Spartan races in Europe, to taking a Leap of Faith on this little company called Rogue Expeditions. What was that like for you?

I had been taking Leaps of Faith for a while, so I was definitely open to it. I've always trusted my gut, whatever feels like the right thing to do in terms of just from an energy perspective. You just know if something's leading the right way or not. I had studied engineering in college and almost did a corporate life. I did two years working in London and then went traveling in South America for two years. I remember always thinking that was the right decision. It taught me a skill set, which is always just to trust your gut and go the right way, that you think you're going to learn new things and work with the right people. It was actually probably an easy enough decision to come over to Rogue. I think we talked about it for a while. It was a possibility. I was pretty wrapped up in Spartan. It was a crazy company to work for, just in seeing travel and 24-7 nature to it. So it just took a while to get out of that. But there was no doubt that it would be a good decision. It was just like, when would I finally hit the switch? But it was a very definite moment. I remember I said to Allison on a trip, I was like, that's it. I'm definitely doing it. And when I got back, I think it still took three or four months to finally disengage or unentangle from the Spartan octopus. But it was a good decision and sort of an easy decision in terms of it. It just seemed to be the right way to go. And I never looked back since. And yeah, I mean, it's a unique thing to kind of go into because it's very much Allison and Gabe started it. And they knew the ins and outs of it. But to let a third person into it was probably a big step for them. But they just from the beginning, the way they handled that and brought me into the fold, it just worked from the off. And then you had to touch back on a lot of Allison's stories about how they were living and dying and cancellations. I mean, one of the most fun parts of writing the book is that I've now got to get all of the background. I didn't know all of the ins and outs of their life before I got involved in the company. But writing the book was a fun journey down memory lane for me because sort of the process was that I would send them an email with three or four bullet points, please talk about the old days when you were living in the RV or whatever. Some of the recordings from those that they sent me are priceless and really should be probably aired to the public. I mean, I got a good...

Outtakes. Yes. I want some exclusive audio for the podcast.

I could definitely facilitate that because there's very different memories on the finer points of life in the RV and exactly who got the directions wrong or who did what. They were sort of falling out in real time on a voice audio and then sending it over to me to kind of get it into shape to go into a book. So that was the fun part of the process.

Chris, the outcome was always Allison's memory was correct and mine was wrong.

I know how that goes.

I follow up with photo proof.

Allison's got the evidence. That's what matters. That's awesome. Yes, we've skipped over and won't go into, but you'll have to read the book for the period of them building the business, living out of an RV, traveling the country. I want to talk about the vibes of these trips just really quickly. We kind of touched on earlier with the Sahara story and the campfires. To me, one of the things that just oozed throughout the book was just the positive and happy vibes that these trips bring because you've got running at the center, but ultimately you layer in all these other elements of great food, wine, cultural experiences, getting to meet the local people and so forth. I want to tell my own story, and Allison, you can jump in on this with me, which is my trip to Slovenia and Croatia. One of my favorite moments on that trip was when we arrived at our location in Croatia, which sort of this farmhouse that this older Austrian couple owns, and they were our hosts. Allison and Katie, who were guides of that trip, they kept telling us as we took the ferry over to this island that we would get a snack when we arrived. And we had lunch on the boat and we weren't supposed to eat that much, but we were hungry because we'd been driving and transitioning from Slovenia to this island. And so of course, everybody's thinking, I'm hungry, we're running a lot, let's just eat. And so a lot of people ended up buying extra snacks on the boat and so forth. We ate probably too much. We show up to this farmhouse to get our snack and we're greeted with April spritzers to start. And then what ended up being a five or six course meal, complete with dessert, starting with dipping like hummus and other things. And then there was like polenta and salad and veal and some sort of dessert afterwards. I mean, it was like a full on meal. And in the middle of the afternoon between our lunch and our dinner, which was also amazing, but hanging out on their patio in the amazing weather there on the island, getting their stories and homemade, by the way, homemade home cooked meals that they had basically prepped from stuff they bought at the market that morning. And it was just a really cool experience. I think that was one of my favorite meals on that trip. But those kind of experiences, sort of the nature of all of those trips, of these unique experiences in each of the places that you go.

Yeah, I think that farmhouse, you know, that's a perfect example of the kind of properties and places we try to incorporate into every trip, and it's going to have its own flavor in each destination, obviously. But we really, really put emphasis on trying to go stay with little locally owned B&Bs, family-run guest houses, things like that. We want people to actually interact with people who actually live there. You know, you're going to be treated really well. You're going to eat really well and all this kind of stuff. But, you know, we have no interest in going to like a big chain hotel and kind of you can get that stuff at home. That's fine. We want some character. The farmhouse style, I think, is the best. We have some version of that on almost every trip. And yeah, you just you really get a bunch of people. You know, they're connecting over running, but you're getting people out of their normal lives. You're getting them totally into a new place. And while things are, you know, we're taking care of details, you don't have to waste your time figuring that out. Like, how can I go get a meal with a local family? Like, we're setting that up for you. So you don't have to waste time trying to figure it out. But we're also getting people out of their comfort zone in a lot of ways. For some people, that's the travel itself. For other people, that's no big deal. But maybe they're running more than they would run at home. I would say almost everybody runs significantly more on a trip than they run at home. Or some aspect of the adventure, like there's trips. We do rafting. We do other things other than running. And so everybody in some way is out of their comfort zone. For other people, it's just traveling with strangers. Like, that's terrifying for some people. That'd be terrifying for me. I know now that I love it. But for a lot of people, that's scary. And I think when you do that, that really, really helps people bond and it really just solidifies that experience in their memories, because they get taken a little bit out of their comfort zone and then they overcome it. And then it just becomes this thing that they're never, ever going to forget. And I think that's really where a lot of the magic comes from on every trip.

Truly. And now that we have everybody eager to go book a trip, Allison, tell us what the current status is of trips.

Oh, I don't know. That's pretty much the current status. We opened up the second half of 2021 with full refund guarantees because obviously we have to plan things, but we were not able to know what the border situations were going to be. So we're opening them. We've mostly filled up most of what we have. You know, the summer is looking less and less likely every day, although there was a really good announcement out of the EU. A few days ago, they claimed that they'll be letting in vaccinated Americans this summer. No word yet on dates or exactly what the rules for each country will be. So it's positive news, but I wouldn't say we're super excited yet until it happens. So we'll see. You know, British Columbia would be our first trip at the moment in July. We're definitely getting down to the wire with that one. People are definitely willing to hang on as long as possible if there's any chance they're going to start letting tourists in. But it's not really moving as fast as we would like. You know, we have Ireland after that. We've got our Oregon trips this summer, which will definitely happen. Those sold out quickly, which is great. And then we feel pretty, I still feel pretty good about the fall. We feel really good about Morocco this fall. Technically, borders are open already. And if the EU is going to make it easier to transit through, then we should be good to go there. And we're pretty much sold out on those trips, which is great. And then I think Kenya will be good to go, and South Africa will just have to wait and see. But I think the EU is fairly good out of South Africa right now. And then we're going to go big in 2022. There you go.

Fingers crossed.

Yeah, I wish I had more definitive answers, but we're completely at the mercy of borders right now. It's not something we can control or predict, and we're not interested. You know, last year we technically could have done our US trips, but we were not interested in a trip where people, you know, have to social distance and wear masks and not interact. That totally kills the magic. And we know that, you know, it's a big investment of time and money to do these trips. And we want people to get the full experience. So we want to make sure they're going to get the whole experience. And we're also not interested in taking a group somewhere where there's borders are still opening and closing on a whim. We don't want to put people in that situation. So I think every day we're getting closer to a more stabilized situation. I've been saying that for a while, but I feel like we really are now.

Yes, again, fingers crossed. Okay, I've got a final question for all of you. And I'll give you a minute to think about it because I'm going to ask Sean how they can get the book. But final question would be the biggest lesson you would take from your experience in the Rogue Expeditions journey that you would want to share with somebody else, whether that be in life, in business, in running, whatever it may be. So think about that answer while Sean tells us where people can get the book.

Maybe Allison should tell us where we can get the book. She is my designated agent for all these.

Nice. Even better, Allison.

Yes, so starting May 1st, and I believe this is airing after that date, just go to our website, rogexpeditions.com backslashventure, and you can buy it right there. So we're going to take pre-orders for two weeks. That's for the print book and the e-book, and we will ship out print books and email the e-books on June 1st. And then after that, things will be more widely available in mid-June. But go ahead and get on that pre-order. We would love it. But yeah, just head to our website. And rogexpeditions.com, as I've said before on this podcast, has one E.

One E in the middle. The Sharon E, Rogue and Expeditions, Sharon E in the URL. I will also include that in the show notes. So going to you, Sean, then about the question. So what's your biggest lesson from your journey with Rogue Expeditions?

If I could sum it up, I would say just be curious. You know, I think our trips are obviously about running. They're about travel and everything else. But I think they're mostly about just being curious about the world. And we try to facilitate good experiences for people that might open them up to all kinds of different thinking and lessons. And it's not us giving them the lessons. It's the world. We just kind of bring them places and book them accommodation and find them good runs. And people have good experiences. But that begins with being curious enough to give it a go. And maybe people have been finding that out in a different way in the last year. We haven't been able to cross borders, but we've been maybe doing it in your neighborhood a little bit more or just changing your routine up or whatever else. So that's probably my biggest takeaway.

Or on Zoom in some cases. Gabe, what about you?

For me, I think it's kind of the travel motto, which is slow down, observe and respect. I think if you just kind of take a step back in life and just look at other cultures and listen instead of talking, and you'll learn a lot from other people, how they do things, doing things differently isn't necessarily bad, it can be better. But yeah, I think that's how we all grow within ourselves, is to slow down and listen to other people, do less better.

Yeah, and related to that, put your device down and experience the things around you, which I think is one of the cool things about trips as well. Allison, you get the last word.

I think mine, probably more from a business perspective and life perspective, is go do the thing you want to do. None of us know how much time we have here, and I think there's nothing but regret if you don't try the things you want to do. Translate into running, if you just keep moving forward and you want it bad enough, you're going to figure out ways to make it happen. You're going to find the right people, and things are going to work out. It may not always be the way you mapped it out, but it's going to succeed, and you've got, like I said, one shot here, and you should really spend your time doing something you really, really love and care about. It can really pay off huge.

I love it. Go do the thing. And on that list, I would put go take a trip, because they are epic running and unforgettable running adventures. Awesome, guys. Thanks so much, Allison, Gabe, and Sean, for joining and for putting this book out. It's a really, really fun read, and I'm excited for our listeners to check it out. Thanks, guys.

Thanks for having us, Chris.

There you go. Allison, Gabe, and Sean talking about Rogue Expeditions. Again, you can get the book by going to rogueexpeditions.com forward slash venture. I'll put that in the show notes. You can also, of course, go to rogueexpeditions.com. That's with one E in the middle and learn about all of the great destinations across the world and see what might be available for the fall. Again, fingers crossed that we'll be able to get trips going again this year pending all of the pandemic protocols. Thanks to that crew for joining me. Thanks to all of you for listening. We'll wrap this episode 231 here. As always, you can check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Twitter, Instagram, or Facebook at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.