Hey, everybody, it is episode 72 of the Running Rogue Podcast. This is Chris coming at you from Austin, Texas. Steve is with me. Hey, Steve.

Hello, world.

We are excited to be coming at you this week for a variety of reasons. We've got on our main topic side, we've got a couple of things we're going to be covering. The first is following up on our Purpose in Practice episodes, where we talked to Lee, Amanda, and Greg from our podcast training group about their purpose. And so we're going to be following up with them about how those discussions played out beyond and how they helped them in training and in their goal races. So we'll be covering that. And in addition, kind of getting their perspective on the podcast training group, learning a little bit about how they adapted to that training and also just giving you the opportunity for those who might be interested in a podcast group to learn a little bit more about how that works because we'll be restarting that group May 7th. So that'll be coming up and we've got all that info posted. We're going to be kind of talking about the details of that after our conversation with Lee, Greg and Amanda again today. So I will post in the show notes where you can kind of fast forward to get that information if you want it. It's also on our website. If you go under the training button and click on podcast training, you can find it there. So check that out if you're interested in learning more. For our intro topic today, Steve, we've got to go to London Marathon. Recap. Recap. What a race. We did our picks last time.

You kicked ass, Chris.

Well, I did all right. I did all right on the men's side, at least. So let's start there. We of course both picked Kipchoge to get the win and he did in a solid 204 in those conditions. And second place was a new young Ethiopian athlete, Kitada, and then Mofara, as I predicted, finished out the podium. I think I also even predicted his rough time, because I said high 205, low 206. So he was just over 206. So I got one and three correct. You got one correct. And I don't think anybody picked the young Ethiopian to be on the podium amidst that field. But the way it went out so fast, it played into the hands of those who might be ready to handle some chaos. And there was chaos. Yeah, so they went out in 422. So they went out 15 seconds faster than that, ran 1348, I believe, for the first 5K, which. Is almost a minute faster than world record pace across the first 3 miles. So they just went out blazing fast in a race that was going to be warm. I mean, it started in the low 60s, from what I understand, warmed up into the 70s. And there was no clouds. So it was blazing sun and Jean, one of my athletes who was there, said she was sweating on the starting line. So it was a warm day, and yet they went out in what we believe, from all the reports, was the fastest first half of a marathon ever.

Yeah, I don't even understand how this happened, Chris, because it was not planned. So this is one of the issues that happened with these paced races, is that you get some yahoos who go out in 1348 for the first fucking 5k of a marathon, which is absolutely insane. And I do think this is not the first time this has happened at this race. This race is known for, I guess there's just no discipline. I think they need to take the money away from these paces, tell them they're not going to make money if they don't hit the paces that they do, because this is just ridiculous. No matter how geared up and excited you are, you can't go out that fast. 422 for the first mile, 1348 through the first half. It's just crazy. I don't know, at that part, I almost didn't watch that part, Chris. I jumped in at about 6 in the morning, and I went back and watched the NBC Gold, and I got to watch it from the beginning. And I started to fast forward, because there was so much crap on that feed, by the way, the first part of it. I was like, I'm so glad I got through a lot of that stuff.

Don't get me started.

I know, we should leave that alone. But anyway, so I almost went, then I started at the men's race, where the men's race started. And thank goodness I did, because I would have not realized how much drama there was in that first part. But it was just crazy. Just crazy.

Yeah, so they were basically going out in the equivalent of a 156 marathon pace through the first 5K.

And they went with it. That's the crazy thing. Kocchoky just said...

Farah was supposed to... there were supposed to be two groups at the beginning. One targeting a 101 half pace and then one targeting a 101.45 half pace. Farah had said he might go with that second group depending on who went with the first group. And he decided... and then as the race went out fast like that, all the paces went together. It was one big group. And so, he had no choice but just to go with that hot pace. And you had a pack there together, including Kipchoge and Adola and all the Katata ultimately and all the folks that went out in that crazy, crazy pace with the pacers. And there was no second group. That was completely obliterated from the beginning. Which really only benefited Kipchoge at the end of the day. I mean, you know, somebody who was a guy who got second?

What was his name?

I can't.

I mean, it definitely helped him. But that guy was just like he was like Adola, Adola from Berlin before that. He just caught a flyer and those Ethiopians, the young ones, they're just, you know, were ignorant as bliss to follow. They're just dumb runners. They go out after it. They just stick with it. And next thing they know, their whole plan was to follow. And you could tell he was behind Kipchoge. Like, there was no distance. He was right up in his business the whole way.

Smart man, like Adola was in the first part of Berlin.

Yeah, those races played out very similarly, at least the one and two. Of course, you didn't have the same crazy drama that happened. Berlin takes care of their business in terms of a paced race, but this is now London's second or third time to have this crazy business happening. And we need to, I think it needs to be rethought. This entire, there's, Chris, I don't know if this is the time to do it, but there's an amazing article or podcast, I mean, a blog put out by Tony Revis about London 2018, which he discusses this issue of pacing and just why are we setting up ourselves for failure as fans and are the best in the world by chasing a number that really doesn't really matter to anybody except a shoe company maybe. And everybody's been conditioned to care about this of world record time, but we haven't worried about, I watched the 5, 000 and 10, 000 at every major meet, and I know nobody's gonna break Paqueli's record anytime soon, and I don't really care. And the races I see that are paced that way, there's no intrigue, there's no game of foot. So anyway, I'm not saying let's get rid of paced races because I do understand their placement, especially in the marathon, but we've got to over, we were way out of whack on this, and it's creating less than exciting races.

Well, and if you're gonna say we want to break the record of 202.57, then why not run a reasonable pace to actually achieve that? Exactly. Because, and I follow Ross Tucker on Twitter, he's a sports scientist, and he's under the Twitter moniker at Science of Sport. He does a good job of following these races and kind of live tweeting. And he also has updates on a lot of topics, so he's a good Twitter follow. But he was just talking about how, not only are you fighting the science about pacing, also in this case, you're fighting the physiology of heat and the fact that it was gonna be difficult to get a world record given the conditions no matter what. The Dominic who transited us texted me an interesting analogy slash metaphor. He said, going out in that pace for Kipchoge was like him having pocket aces before the flop and just basically going all in. Because for him, he knew he had the best hand, so putting a big bet out there only benefited him and made it more chaotic for those others who had to sort of pucker their sphincters and be like, okay, hold on for dear life. And ultimately, the flop came and Kipchoge won because that's what Kipchoge does. I mean, I think the fact that he ran a 204 after that opening pace in those conditions is unbelievable. I consider that a world record level effort.

Absolutely. I thought that was the best race that I've seen him run outside of the Olympics. The Olympic Games, he just ran such a masterful, beautiful race. It's really hard. But damn, if the guy didn't run a beautiful race there, it was ugly to start and it wasn't his fault, but he did. I mean, Chris late in that race, 35K, he doesn't even bat an eye that the other guys behind him. You can tell he doesn't even care. He put the accelerator down once or twice in there. I remember watching, and we got a couple little smiles out of him, but they were different than his usual grimace. They were real smiles. And you could just see the master at work. Nothing was gonna stop him from doing it. And he did, he faded and he didn't run. He probably considers this less than beautiful, but he did what he was able to do with the cards he was dealt early on, that everybody was dealt and with the way the heat went. Chris, that was a masterful race. In my opinion, if I'm another marathoner in the world, I would not watch Kipchoge run another step because all he's gonna do is intimidate you to the point where you think you can't beat him. Because what he did at London is, even for Kipchoge, in my opinion, that was mind-boggling. I mean, it's almost without words to say how smooth, how rhythmic, how strong he was over the last, I mean, Chris, it was a show of incredible 43. It takes one-off guys who, who knows whether to clean or not, nobody knows anything about these young guys when they come in. And you know, Idola wasn't able to show up on this day. He ended up running pretty damn slow, actually. So Idola, he was like, yeah, I was like, so I don't wanna go into that, right? But it's a, one-offs can get in there, but can anybody, he's shown no over, for the last, you know, six years, yes, he's shown.

Since 2013, he hasn't lost a marathon.

And he's been brilliant in almost all of his marathons.

And the only time he lost was in Berlin in 2013, and he got second.

To the world record.

To Wilson Kipsang, who ran the world record that day. So he's run eight straight, he's won eight straight marathon, marathons, seven of those that have been major marathons, and that doesn't even count the Breaking Two project, where he basically won that race too. So to me, before I would have said, well, I wanna see Kipchoge get the world record before I could say he's the GOAT marathoner of all time. But now after watching this race, signed, sealed and delivered, Kipchoge is the GOAT.

Yeah, so what do you make of these people who are hollering for him to run a real race, like New York City or Boston? I mean, what's your feeling on that?

I don't think it changes his legacy as the greatest of all time. I think it'd be awesome because it is different. I don't think, I would love to see him at Boston. I mean, to me, and you know, I think he might be in New York this year because he was in New York this past year and they were clearly trying to woo him.

Yes, you can see he was at the finish line for Quammer Mort.

So I think I would love to see him there. I mean, just because I think it would extend his legacy, but I don't think he needs it.

Yeah, number one, I just think marathons are different. We all know that. People run different courses at different races for different times, and they all recognize that. And those folks out there who don't, one's not better than the other, they're just different. And in head-to-head competition on the biggest stage of all at the Olympic Games, Kipchoge took everybody's punches and left them in the dust. So I just think, I would love to see him do it too, Chris, but I don't think he has any, he should only do it because it's how he wants, if he wants to run a beautiful race on a different kind of course. I would like, I do think both these courses, I just don't think anybody can beat him. I just don't think there's a person out there that can beat him right now. And to say that in a marathon with all the variables, Chris, that's crazy to say. We just saw Joffrey Karoui, who we thought was the heir apparent and the one who can knock him off, get embarrassed out on that course because he was hubris or stupidity or whatever it was. He just paid no attention to his conditions or his course and he died. But would Kipchoge make that mistake? No. And it wasn't balls. It was stupidity in Karoui's case, you know? Right.

Yeah, no, I mean you've seen him win all kinds of races in any conditions. He's in so much control, physically and mentally. I don't think there will be anyone challenging him for a while. I mean, to me, it's like you thought maybe Adola, but clearly Adola didn't get it done in London. So who's going to be the challenger? It's not Bicaylee. Bicaylee ran a-

Bicaylee's a champ. I'm off the Bicaylee. I'm off of Team Bicaylee. It took me a long time to get off Team Bicaylee, but I'm off.

Bicaylee's riding off into the retirement sunset and milking every appearance he can.

I mean, it's Joffrey Carui and maybe one of these other-

And maybe Farah.

Yes.

So people are saying Farah after his performance. So what do you make of Farah's performance?

I thought it was unbelievably- I was very impressed with it. I'm not a big Mo Farah fan. I don't like the way he wins. I didn't like him in 08. I didn't like him in 12. I didn't like him in 16 and the way he wins and the sort of showboat mentality he has bothers me. It's good for the sport, but I don't really like it. But dude, he put up at this race, and it was hot. You saw him drift off the back. How many times did he go off the back of that pack, Chris, for a little bit, only to slowly but surely rejoin and get back into positioning so he could be where he needed to be? And that dude was in the hurt locker, Chris. He was in the hurt locker from about 30K on, and he held strong. The training that he did over this last cycle, it was obvious that he is gonna be good at the marathon. I think he, will he be able to beat a Kipchoge? I do think it creates a very interesting storyline going into Tokyo, going into 2019, and then going into Tokyo. I don't think we'll see these two guys go head to head again until we get to the Olympic marathon. I'll be very surprised if they go head to head again. I think Mo learned enough on that course that he's now gonna play, he's gonna play the game and dip, nip and tuck and dot bob and weave and try to stay out of it so that on race day, in a marathon scenario, will the race go slow enough for him to be able to take advantage of it. I do think you're gonna have Joffrey Karui in there as well, and then who knows any of these new Kenyan and Ethiopians that might show up on that day. But Chris, I was big balls, as they've been talking about on the Let's Run Forum. I'm complete agreement with him. Again, I'm not the biggest fan of him, but I do think that that race was surprising and really encouraging for the state of marathoning on the men's side. What do you think?

Yeah, well, you got to give him props for getting the record, the British record, by about 50 seconds.

Holy shit, that was a hard way to do it, wasn't it? Although it was easier than Steve's version. Steve went out even faster, didn't he? Or almost, no, no, no.

Not as fast.

Not as fast, right.

So, but not too dissimilar. So Farah went out 201, or sorry, 101 and then finished in 105. So he had a four-minute positive split. Whereas, I think Steve Jones' was more like a 202, or sorry, 102, 105. So a three-minute positive split.

But the world record at the time of the half marathon at that time was probably was already at one, it was only a minute off the world record, you know, but crazy.

To me, the biggest thing here was the victories for Mo will be that he went with it. You know, he had a decision to make when he felt that pace going out too hot. He had already had a decision to make potentially between two groups, you know, that first group and the second group. So he knew that coming in and he had said afterwards that he was basically gonna play it out in the race, depending on who went with which group. And he made the decision because there was only one group to go with it and you gotta give him credit for that because he could have backed off knowing that it was suicidal pace because I think anybody could have done that.

Yeah.

I mean, I don't even know how Gary Lowe is his coach. I don't know what Gary was saying. He was probably screaming at his monitor trying to figure out a way to get in contact with him. But yeah, you're right.

So going with it, big win, and then hanging on. There were others that couldn't hang on and he held it together very well considering. So you gotta give him props and getting on a podium in a major marathon like London, especially with that field, as we said, it was one of the most stacked we've seen. That's a big deal.

I had an argument with one of my runners who said to me, he's not a real marathoner. Kristen, Mo Farah is a real marathoner. I'm so sorry to tell this to you. And I'll eat my hat if I'm wrong the next one. I'm not saying that he's gonna win. I'm just saying he's gonna be in the mix at the big races, no matter what, if he chooses to go for it.

It will be interesting to see where he goes next. So we will see, but hats off to Kipchoge Kitada and Farah on the London podium. On the women's side, the pace was hot too. The women actually went out in 107.16, a little faster than their targeted pace of 107.30, which is actually nine seconds faster than the US half marathon record set by Molly Huddle in Houston this past January. So that just gives you a little perspective on how fast they were rolling and how fast Paula Radcliffe ran back in 2003 in London when she ran 215. It's just insane, insane. And so initially it was Kataini, DeBaba, and the pace makers, the male pace makers.

And those guys did their job unlike the men's.

More or less, a little bit fast.

A little fast, but.

15 seconds.

Not as crazy as.

Through the half at least. So, but DeBaba started falling back pretty early in the mix. And then Kittany was on her own for a while, but then Kittany started to really fall off in the latter half of the race.

And DeBaba did a really good job when she fell off, Chris, for a while before 30K. I mean, I thought, I was really, I remember thinking, wait a second, DeBaba looked like she couldn't go, right? And just stayed in her zone when Mary went. Then Mary didn't just go. It was just a subtle attrition. And it looked to me at that point, like DeBaba was trying to conserve, to be prepared. But no, we found out soon, then she started walking. I mean, she just stopped.

She just stopped, yeah. She clearly fell apart. And then Ketane, when the wheels came off, the wheels came off fairly quickly. And that left the door wide open for who you basically called as your wild card, Vivian Chariot. We had, we've been talking about her as one of those athletes that you know is just gonna be made for the marathon when she finally made the move full time. And I think she showed with this race, going out smart, she was about a minute behind at halfway, but ran relatively even splits. She was a slight positive split in those warm conditions, but held it together really well. I think it was only 30 or 40 seconds, positive split. Ultimately came by Ketane and got it done.

I mean, just to remind our listeners who may not be on the up and up about Vivian Chariot, she's the Olympic gold medalist from 2016 in the 5, 000, beating Ayanna in a very big upset. In an upset that everyone thought there was just no way that that would happen. They were sure that Ayanna would win it, especially since she broke the world record in the 10K before it. So she is known now as a scalp taker and as someone who will run a smart race and this one just cements her, Chris. I mean, this was a phenomenal, this was a better win. I thought this was more impressive for her than Moe's race was for him, you know? This was a huge deal. She beat the two best, she beat the baby face killer, she beat who you and I have already described on this podcast as being the greatest female distance runner of all time, and at the marathon distance, and then she beat Mary Kutaini, who at this point in time is, for most everybody, the current best marathoner in the world. And she did it in a way that was super impressive, although we do have to say, Chris, these ladies were straight up ballsy. This was, they did not back down from the mission that they had put out there. The two of them went after it. They worked together. Did you see them sharing water bottles on the course? It was a really cool display to me of just the sprit of core that's out there for these women and two different countries, but yet they recognized they needed each other for as long as they could possibly have each other. But I want to say one thing, Chris. I already had a lot of respect for Mary Cattaney, but this race, I got huge amounts of respect for her. Now, I do have to caveat that with the fact that she got a check written to her for $250, 000, a quarter of a million dollars, by finishing and beating DiBaba. She needed to stay ahead. She had to beat DiBaba because they tied and she had to have a head-to-head to get her. So there's a really good, compelling reason to be tough like that, but I thought she ran an incredibly tough race over those final K's. And I think she'll bounce back from this pretty well. I think she might not have the same hubris, but I think they ran into a hot day. Do you think they would have got this time if they'd had better weather? Do you think they were, that they just didn't look like they were going to be able to get this record, Chris?

No, I think Kipchoge could have broken the world record, but I don't think Kataini was gonna get to the 215. I think the women's only would have gone down for sure.

But it wasn't on tap.

It's, you know, but, and Kataini ran that last year in 2702 to drop another minute and a half in any, for anyone in any marathon is huge. And for Kataini, I think it's a bigger step than she's quite ready for.

And that, but that wasn't the objective. I mean, their objective was 215.

Right, that's my point.

Yeah.

So I think they're still a little bit off of that.

Yeah, I don't think it's, now, in fairness to the women, the record that is out there is so far was such a performance that the men are not dealing with that anymore. They have been, performance increases in the marathon to the level of, that we've seen, that we saw from Paula Radcliffe, but not currently. We could probably name four or five people that we think, well, two or three people that we think could break the men's world record. But right now, I don't see anybody, other than Avivian Chiriot, maybe Dababa as she gets, but they're still a little ways away. This is not gonna happen in the next year, I don't think.

Right, it's gonna take good conditions. But I think Chiriot, with this race, sort of cemented the fact that she's there, she's the force to be reckoned with, ran the fourth fastest women's marathon of all time, and to finish in 218 and change, is now only behind Ababa and Kataini and Radcliffe on that all time list, and is relatively new to the marathon and game with lots of speed. So it's gonna be interesting to see how she develops.

And she was a straight, straight killer out there. Her face, did you watch that? She just, no joy until the final five meters. I mean, it was purely business. She was on the business end of serving to the rest of the world that she is a force to be reckoned with in the marathon. And I've been a Vivian Chariot fan for a long time. I've watched her groove through the ranks and was beside myself in Rio when she won the gold medal. And still, I'm excited for this. And Chris does the best, just keep getting better. I mean, women's marathoning at this point is just stupid crazy. I mean, the men's marathon is stupid crazy. It's what a great time to be a fan of the sport, in my opinion. It's just a great time.

For sure. Katani did hold on to get fifth in 224 to earn the tiebreaker against Ababa in that world majors marathon championships. Quarter million dollar payday for a year's worth of marathoning is pretty awesome.

And it probably means a whole lot. I don't know. I hate to say this. It seems to me it means a whole lot more to Mary Katani than it will to Ababa. But who am I to say, right? They got pretty big contracts. Those ladies do, though. Guarantee you.

So Gladys Chirona, who I had picked on the podium, she ended up fourth. And a couple of folks that we didn't name, Bridget Koski and Tadelek Michaili, ended up second and third in 220 and 221, respectively. They didn't have the same pedigree of the others that we had talked about, but clearly got it done, both in PRs for those two athletes. And it just goes to show you there's a lot of talent on both the men and women side coming to the marathon at younger and younger ages, because that's where the money is, and it's gonna make it interesting, all of these races, because you just never know. It also makes more impressive Kipchoge's run.

I was about to just say it again. I mean, Chris, I come away from this race thinking that it's not possible to have a better impression of early Kipchoge, and I just can't. And then, did you see that video that was on Bouncing Around on Let's Run of his workout that he did eight miles? Basically, we would consider for him half marathon pace, and then with a pretty short recovery, and then four 400s after that. It's just a workman's approach. People are like, you gotta see this crazy workout. And I'm like, that's not a crazy workout. Comparatively, my team, Rogue Athletes, we have done that workout. So to me, it's like, it's not that. It was the least impressive workout, but to me, most impressive is, this is how he trains. He keeps a steady, consistent load, nothing flashy. He's not got flash, he's got panache, but he's not got flash. He's the anti-Fera, right? He's the anti-ego getter, and he is a straight up assassin. I mean, I've, it's just, I don't know that we've seen this kind of domination since Pekele was dominating in the five and the 10, 10 years ago. You know, this is something on a level that I've never seen, and as we talked about, if we do get to see him in some other marathon races, and if he wins the Olympic gold medal and gets a world record, I mean, it's just done. But he doesn't seem that concerned. He's supposed to run a beautiful race.

Run a beautiful race. We didn't talk about the American men, we'll get back to that, but on the women's side, we're Becky Wade, Stephanie Bruce finished 10th and 11th with Stephanie in 10th and Becky in 11th. Really solid top 11 performances for those two. I know they didn't get the times that they wanted. They were both in the two, low 230 range, 232 and 235. What the heat, I think, got to both of those runners. What do you make of their races?

I mean, I think that they were solid, but it's hard to really say given the weather conditions. I mean, Mike, as you said, you had an athlete who ran London. I had an athlete that ran London. And they both indicated that it was a shit show out there. It was a really, really tough day. And these are heat acclimated runners who are used to that. We didn't have quite as many hot days this cycle as we have in the past. We've had pretty good weather here. But still, hard to say exactly how much the weather had an effect. I do think for both of them, well, I think that was a really good race for Becky. I think she needed another confidence booster. I think she's capable of more. I don't think it wasn't a bad performance for her. And I don't think it was a bad performance for Stephanie. But I do think we were hoping for more from her. I think we were hoping that we would be able to start talking about her in the conversation of being a real chance to be a person to represent the United States in 2020 in Tokyo in the marathon. But she seemed to... On this race performance, Chris, she was a step away. She's not there yet.

Still not there yet.

And she's getting... You go out there and run a race, and then Gwen Jorgensen gets more pub for her potential half marathon. And it must be hard to be a Stephanie Bruce and say, what else do I have to do to get people's attention? Well, evidently, win a gold medal in a different event. But yeah, I mean, I think solid performances from the two of them, but still really solid for Becky, but probably, I'm sure Stephanie walked away from that disappointed, and maybe most disappointed that the conditions weren't set for her to have the kind of day she wanted.

Yep, still two to watch, though, as we get ready for the 2020 trials on the men's American side. Fernando Cabada did better than we gave him credit for.

We talked smack, and thanks to Jessica Head for calling us on it and saying, you haters, follow Cabada, find out about him. And I have not listened to the podcast that she recommended I listened to yet. We've been a bit busy here at Rogue doing a few things. But I'm looking forward to that, Jessica, and looking forward to having an opportunity to become a fan. I am one who is always looking for warriors to cheer for. So I just was disappointed with multiple tough races.

So Kabata ended up 13th in 217 as first American. I don't know if he'd gotten his official trials qualifier yet, but he's got it now.

But it's done now.

And Sam Chalenga, who we had hoped more from, and who went out in 104, so on 208 pace, that we had talked about, didn't have a strong finish, had a really slow second half for him, finished in 221 in 15th place. You gotta give him props for finishing. But I know this isn't the race that Sam wanted. He's now sort of one of three in his marathon so far. So what do you think for him?

I don't know. It's still a story to be told, in my opinion. We will see. I'm not there yet.

Work in process.

Yes. He's still young enough and young enough in the marathon. And the thing I love about Sam Chalenga, I've watched him run many times. Boy's a baller. He likes to race. He races tough. He races out front. He's willing to go for it. And I just hope that he, I really would love to see him run really well. So we'll see.

Me too. I think the win for him here, especially after DNFing his first marathon, is the fact that he finished. My guess is he didn't want to finish after going out in 104 and then coming back in a slower second half. My guess is he had moments where he wanted to walk off that course, but he didn't.

But he didn't.

And that's a big deal for a marathoner, especially for the marathon mindset. So we'll see if that plays out positively for him in the future. But it was an epic day in London. And the next time we enter a podcast, we're gonna have to not talk about marathons, Steve, just to break it up.

Evidently, we won't talk about pole vaulters either, but.

So there you go, that's our intro for today. We're gonna now turn to our discussion with Lee, Amanda and Greg in following up to our Purpose in Practice series that we started. So here we go. All right, so we're welcoming Lee, Amanda and Greg to the show all together with us on our interface here that we use to connect people. So it's gonna be a little crazy. We've got five of us in the mix, which is the most we've ever had in a conversation. So quickly say hello, Lee, Amanda and Greg. Hey world. Awesome, so you'll remember that we had Lee and Amanda on our Purpose in Practice part one episode and we had Greg on our Purpose in Practice part two episode to talk about their purpose, their statements of purpose and get some feedback and work through it with us. And so we've got kind of that history and if you wanna go back and listen to those episodes first, I think they will be helpful, although I don't think you have to necessarily listen to those. What we wanted to do now that Lee, Amanda and Greg have all finished their goal races, we wanted to follow up on those purpose discussions and sort of get some feedback on how those conversations went after the fact as they digested them. And then, of course, what they carried with them into the rest of their training and into their goal races. We're happy to report that Amanda and Greg both got personal best times at the Coastal Delaware Marathon this past weekend.

They ran together, which is so weird, it's so unusual.

Meeting each other for the first time in person at the race. And then Lee was a part of the epic day, which was Marathon Monday in Boston, where the clouds opened up and the winds were blown from the gods. And so he had some chaos to deal with that ultimately resulted in him not getting his goal. But I think Lee learned a few things as a part of it, so we'll talk about that as we get to it. So first, and we'll kind of go in order of how those podcasts went. So we'll start with Lee. We'll put you on the hot seat first, Lee. First, we wanted to just get your perspective on listening back to yourself. When you did, after that conversation, what did you reflect on? What did you think you learned from that statement of purpose conversation? And how did that make your statement of purpose evolve as that conversation sunk in?

Yeah, you know, it's funny. I re-listened to that podcast just yesterday, after the Boston Marathon, obviously, and it really resonated more so yesterday than I think even before the Boston Marathon. But I think one thing, you know, if we want to talk about my statement of purpose, my statement of purpose was not prepared for what I got on race day. I think, you know, when I was making the statement of purpose and when we were talking about it, I envisioned a situation where, you know, it was tough going, but I was still in the hunt for my goal time, you know, for the goal race. And what was I going to say, you know, in those critical moments? And my statement of purpose was not ready for, you know, the goals out of reach by mile seven, you know, like that was not, I wasn't ready for that. But coming back to it yesterday, you know, there were a couple of things in that statement of purpose that, I mean, I was really taking it back by. One of them was that whole statement about feeling weak and strong at the same time. And let me tell you, if you didn't feel weak and strong running that Boston Marathon, I don't know when you would. You know, and the other thing that was in there that really changed a lot of my output on everything was that I said, you know, I set high goals and I accept a certain amount of failure as a by-product of that. And so that really, when I heard that, when I heard myself of all people saying that to me, I thought, well, yeah, this is just one of those things. It's a failure and I'm gonna have to, maybe it wasn't even my fault, but I'm gonna have to just suck it up and turn around and make something of it. So I think I need to work on the statement of purpose just in case there's a real shit show out there, but boy, it has come in handy in the last 48 hours for sure.

You know, Lee, you are listening to our podcast a lot. You might know this quote when I use it, but if it's real, it can take the pressure. And what you ran up against was what is real in the scenario of a shit show day? And I do think that at the end of the day, I do think that that's one of the crucial critical pieces of a statement of purpose, is it has to be resonant and useful whether you're having a perfect day or you're having a perfect storm. And it has to be something that's really real because you're going to, especially in Command Performance Marathons, right? We do all this work for so long. You guys worked your asses off in this training program. I know you know you worked your butts off. And you've got to be, you're talking about big stakes. Even if they aren't big stakes on the global scale, they're big stakes on your scale. And you need a statement of purpose that will match that level of effort that you're going to put in, no matter what happens.

Yeah, no doubt.

So one question, follow up question for me, Lee, after we did that recording and you listened to it, did you go back and make changes to the written word you had on your statement of purpose?

I didn't physically go back and rewrite it, but I definitely kept it in the back of my mind. And you guys mentioned having like a quick phrase or something to go back to. Mine was relax, reset, let's go. And to me, the let's go part said a lot, just kind of a bear down and be tough. And so in some ways I did go back to it and try to, I don't know, just reflect upon it, make sure I could re-remind myself why I was in this and everything else. But I'm not one of those guys, like it's not hard to get me up at four in the morning for a hard workout. Like I'll just go, it's easy. That part for me is easy. The hard part is now after the race is over, whether it went good or bad, like how am I gonna get back on the horse? How am I gonna re-motivate myself and sort of stay in the game?

Yeah, well, it sounds like you're already on your way to get back in the game. Let's turn to Amanda. Amanda was our second discussion in that series. And some ways we got to similar places with you, Lee and Amanda. But Amanda, as you reflected on it in that moment after we recorded that, what was your takeaway? What was your reaction? And how did you use that?

Well, going back and listening, I realized that mine definitely could not take the pressure. It was, it did not hold up at mile 21, the way that it was written the first time. And then as I went through and re-looked at it, there was a lot of feelings in there. I like, I love, I feel. And as we all know, your feelings at mile six are not the same feelings that you have at mile 21. So to have something that was stronger than just a feeling, so to, what I did was I just kind of stripped it down and focused on I am, I have, I've done like just really small statements within that, that spoke more to just the core versus the feelings.

I like it. And you are, Amanda. So when you, your race in Coastal Delaware, you and Greg, who we'll get to in a second, we're running together, stayed together through 20 miles. You had a plan to hopefully break three hours, but didn't get that done. You finished in 305, still a three minute PR, but had some stomach issues late in that race. Were you diving back into that in your head when the stomach got queasy?

You know, it's funny because it almost made me laugh because everything else felt good. So I was prepared for those statements for when I started to feel really awful, but like my legs felt good. My head was still in the game. It was my stomach that wasn't holding up. And so it was like, really? This is not what I planned for. So yeah, I mean, it was just like, okay, stay in this, you know, control what you can control and just get it done.

Yeah, I do think the other thing that happens with statement of purpose, I mean, I'm very confident that when you came across the finish line, your ability to deal with your disappointment was much greater than it would have been if you hadn't. Do you think if you hadn't prepared for a statement of purpose, do you believe that to be true? Or do you think that when your stomach goes bad, there's just nothing you can do about it? Oh, well, did it help you deal with that? That that less than optimal finish line experience, even though you PR, even though anybody normal person would tell you, come on, girl, that was great, given the circumstances.

Yes, I do think it helps. I think it because again, it wasn't based on feelings. It was based on what I need to be true. Like, I am a competitor. I am strong. I did the work. And so all of those things when I crossed the finish line were still true, no matter what the clock read.

So, yeah, you know, one of my athletes at the starting line of the Boston Marathon, she has this new thing. She's she's she takes she has a candle, a Mexican, it's like a Mexican Santeria candle or something that she's put a picture of Kipchoge on and a and a sticker that says Team Rogue. And she light lit it at the starting line of the at the finish line of the Boston Marathon as in a funny but silly way of saying, I need to make my offerings to the marathon gods. And it's one of those days, no matter what your world view, in a sense, it's it's funny and laughable and like whatever. But in a sense, it's almost like, as humans, do we have that need to we just know that there's just those things we can't control and it is what it is, right?

And you, you know, as a coach, when we're watching the tracking, you know, there's always and you see someone miss the goal. There's probably fear and trepidation that you can't really explain.

Well, they should have seen you on others. They should have seen you on Sunday track Sunday before we were tracking Scott on his race. Chris, he was missing his paces. If you guys watch him, he was missing it. And I was just like, shit sandwich. And then Chris is like stalking the room, try like opening the opening the every door he can open, like looking out the window, trying to distract himself from the fact that he knows that his athlete is struggling and suffering and dying and there's nothing he can do about it. And I'm like, been there.

So yeah, so that's the way I get it.

Yeah, he does.

You know, I think was also really great for me during this race is because I did run so much of it with Greg and seeing how he was still so strong when I started to not feel well, made me really excited to get to the finish line too, and to check in and see how he did. And I think it was that teammate aspect that, you know, we cross the mats, you know, people are cheering for you or tracking you or watching you. And so, you know, I think that that also helped with my disappointment to know that he got what he wanted.

Speaking of Greg, let's let's go to Greg who did get what he wanted. He got his Boston Qualifier first Boston Qualifier and a PR of 301. Congrats on that, Greg.

30050.

Oh, sorry. Sorry. Yes. I could.

I almost I almost like I gave him the devil eyes.

I was rounding up.

You can round down, but not up.

So so same question in terms of the statement of purpose after you listen to yourself back and reflected on the conversation that we had at the time. What did you take from it? And did did that change how you thought about your statement of purpose?

Yes.

So there are a couple of points that were really valuable to me. Steve mentioned that when we started talking about addiction and that sort of thing, and Steve mentioned that I control this, that I'm in control of this race and I can control the variables or the I can control the controllables, meaning that I can control the training, I can control my diet, my rest, my recovery, nutrition, sleep. And so I really went into the race with that mindset of I control this. That was that was huge for me. And then another point that you made in that first conversation was that the old me from 10 years ago is no longer my point of reference. And throughout training for after that conversation for the rest of training, I just kept going back to Chicago was my last race. And I PR there by about 10 minutes and I got under the Boston qualifying time. And I knew that I was I can endure and I can suffer and I can push through the pain. And so I use that as my reference point. I was no longer thinking that I'm the 250 pound guy living in misery. I'm a different person and that's the person that I'm going up against them. Giving myself all of the benefit of this new training program and coaches for the first time, a group atmosphere. So those two points were really huge for me and really changed my mindset going into the race.

That's awesome. And then how does it feel now when you get it done, when you get the goal? How does that feel now?

I had my stepdaughter was at the finish line, but they all had signs out my sister and her kids and her husband and my wife were at the finish line. And as I was running by, I saw them from about 100 yards out or 100 meters out. And I just started pumping my fist and yelling, we did it. We did it. And like, I mean, I wasn't planning on that doing that, anything like that. I was planning on just kind of going by, but like, I couldn't hold it in. I had no, I knew I was going to push for that time, push to get to as close to three, three hours as possible. But I really, in my mind, I had a little bit of a buffer that I knew that I could get the qualifying time if I was at 305. I thought that I was probably in 302, 303 shape. So I was just ecstatic getting like coming down that final stretch. And, I mean, I've been on a cloud since then. It's the Boston, getting into Boston was something that I thought I'd be chasing until I was 60 years old. And it's just amazing that it happened now.

Going back to your, to your statement of purpose. And, you know, Greg, you, you and our for in that interview that we did, everybody, you know, all three of you guys had to go to a bit of a dark place. But I thought you, you really dove deep. Now, you're also somebody who's really you've you've the challenges you've gone through in your life are ones that you've lived outwardly for people to see. It may be a little bit more than Lee and Amanda have. But I'm curious as to that state that after you finish that statement of purpose, how you see that statement of purpose informing not just your running life, but your life life. What what have you had? Have you been able to reflect on that statement of purpose in other aspects beyond the running? Or does it really sit neat and tidy in just the running world that you that you that you occupy?

No, I think that it's a important point, especially. I mean, the point of reference, I often go back to thinking of myself as how I was before before recovery and before I started running and out of shape. So in my mind, my mind still works the same way as that old, the old version of myself. So using the new point of reference in all aspects of my life has been has been a huge help. Just just builds confidence. And I know that I can do things that I ten years ago would have never thought of doing. I mean, I want to start helping in the community. This is like those are those are things that I just never would have done. And and I do know that I am in control of certain things that before I had no control over. And those two things are huge in all aspects of my life. And it's something that is now now that it's brought to my attention. I can go I can go to that all the time.

Amanda, how about yourself? Have you found that that statement of purpose has resonance beyond your running life?

Oh, absolutely. Yeah, I think that again, like I said, to strip it down and take the feelings out of it applies to all kinds of different areas in your life and that are challenging. And I can say with certainty that I can control what I can control and the rest of it can fall away.

Yeah, I learned a lot from your your struggle with that in your statement of purpose episode because I've spent my career working with athletes always telling them that their feelings are irrelevant. And then leaving it at that and not watching them struggle through what you struggle through and saying, well, they're relevant, but they're not they're not helping. Right. And you gave me another language for that, that allowed me to say, all right, I do. We do. We can get practical applications out of this. Feelings are irrelevant. Quote or idea. And we have to or else it's just, oh, I see that. But it doesn't it doesn't work. You know, it doesn't it doesn't play.

Right. Right.

Well, in the SOP, the statement of hers is supposed to be the foundation, the roots, the the thing that doesn't change the core. And so I think your description of that language shift is really important because, yeah, the feelings are going to happen. They're going to come. But and and and least case, the failure is going to come, too. But the core doesn't change. The reason for being and doing and training doesn't change.

What about you, Lee?

Yeah, I mean, I might flip that on its side a little bit and just say that my my life is more a reflection of my statement of purpose than the than the flip of that. You know, after the Boston Marathon, an old friend of mine from college sent me, he texted me a message saying, you know, sorry about the race, but he was looking at the splits and he was like, yeah, typically, Brendal's still going for it, even though the race. And of course, you flame out in the second half. I was like, yeah, that's the way it goes. But yeah, I think over the years, I've just learned that I'm going to go for it and just accept the consequences if it doesn't work out. And so, yeah, that's not just in running for me. That's in a lot of things. I mean, not to say it's like ruining my life or anything like that, but I'll go for it. And as long as the consequences aren't too dire, you know, I don't wind up in jail. I'll go for it and it's going to be fine.

And to be fair to you, your coaches did tell you to stick to the plan.

Yes, we did.

On the worst of days. Let's just talk about that for a second, Lee. Just for those that maybe weren't in those conditions and didn't run Boston. What was it like? And did you, were you at the school in the main Athletes Village or did you have a private bus?

No, I was in the Athletes Village for about two hours and 45 minutes.

So start there and just explain what you went through that day just to give context.

Sure. So, you know, in the Athletes Village, there are these large tents. They'll keep you out of the rain, but the sides are open to the air, right? And to give you some idea of what it was going on, so the rain would come down and hit the tent, and it would roll off the side of the tent. And then when it hit the ground, it was freezing. And so all around the tent were like these little like five inch high, maybe not five inches, but a couple inches high little ice dams. So that's the weather we were dealing with, right? And we were, I was pretty prepared. Like I smuggled a sleeping bag and some of those little chemical hand warmers and things like that. So I was still cold, but I wasn't like miserable cold. There were some people that just showed up in their singlets and like a space blanket and they were, their hands were shaking too badly to like tie their shoes. I mean, it was really pretty bad. And for me, at least, you know, we were at the starting line. This is kind of funny. And I'm, you know, taking off many, many layers of clothing and like the rain died down and the wind died down just a little bit. And I started thinking to myself, I think it's going to be okay. I was like, I think I'm going to get two and a half hours of a break. And then the gun went off and like, whoosh, it all started right back up. But it was cold and it was windy. I never, not for one step did I ever get loose. I had like a little, I feel like a little groin pull and it really does a lot better if it's warmer outside. And it never loosened up and I never felt like I was in a groove. My first mile split was like seven flat. And it might as well have been six flat. Like it felt just as hard. You know, it wasn't easy. And so my thought process was that I was just going to stubbornly hit some splits and hope that I started feeling better and that the rain would let up and that the wind would let up. And it just never did. And I don't think I checked my watch after like mile eight or ten or something like that. I just stopped looking because I knew it wasn't going to be good. So it was a rough day for sure.

How were you at the finish? Did you were able to get warm quickly or were you one of those that ended up in the tent?

No, I did not end up in the tent, which my wife was just so happy about because it does happen from time to time. When I finished, by the time I hit mile 24 or 25, I had already gone through like the five stages of grief and I was fully in acceptance of what was happening. And so like I fully enjoyed the finish line, like put my hands up, kind of get the crowd going and stuff. But when I crossed the finish line, like I knew I was going to devolve pretty quickly. So I was still kind of in like a pseudo jog all the way to the to the gear check because I was like I cannot get cold and be cold for the next half an hour. And so we got back there and they were they were pretty understaffed, at least in our little spot of the gear check. And I wound up like hopping the little tables and just going in there and helping the volunteers search for bags. Like I found three other people's bags before I found my own. And then I got out of there. But I was able to grab my things, kind of get warmed up and head back to the hotel in a reasonable amount of time, which is lucky.

So I can relate to having those five stages of grief when I had to walk the last four miles of Boston. So talk about that. What went through your mind from Mile 8 to 25 before you accepted what was happening?

Yeah, I mean, I don't know exactly all the five stages of grief, but I know there was definitely some anger in there right around Mile 13 where, you know, when you're in good shape, you can fake marathon pace for a pretty long time. You know what I mean? Like I could hit 620 and in my heart, I knew that is not marathon pace, even though that's what the watch was saying. You know, it was harder than that. So I was totally denying that any of this stuff was happening. Right. And then and then I got angry because I was like, oh, shit, this is not going well. And and I was and, you know, I don't know if I bargained at all in there, but but I was there was a while I was, you know, probably, probably right in the Newton Hills where I was pretty dejected. And I was like, you know, you know, and I was thinking about all the things that I should be thinking of. But in a totally different light, I was saying to myself, you know, man, I worked all this time. I had, you know, my training schedule with you guys was nearly perfect. I mean, I can only think of one workout that did not go well. And, you know, I didn't miss any days like this just doesn't happen. You know, and I was mad about it. I was just like, damn it, this is wasted. You know, I just felt it was totally wasted. Blamed myself for a while and sort of resigned myself that there wasn't much I could do at this point. And once that happened, you know, like that was probably with another two or three miles to go. I stopped pressing. I just was like, you know what, eight minutes is fine. I'm going to clap some hands. I'm going to say hello, I'm going to wave, you know, the crowds and finish up with a smile on my face. And that's kind of what I did.

Well, kudos to you for that. Because as we said on our Boston recap, getting to the line was a victory for many and certainly getting to the finish line. We know that, as you mentioned, you had a really good cycle. I mean, I remember seeing some of your splits posted in our Facebook group on some of those workouts and you were just absolutely crushing it. And because you and I are similar paces, I can very closely relate to what you were doing and the work that you put in. And just you're absolutely killing those workouts. So we and you were both confident about your potential and then, you know, the weather had other plans. But talk about your transition into this group and how much of a change was it? What changed for you and how did you kind of work through that as you ramped into the program?

Yeah, I mean, you know, I was on teams in high school and college and since then, not really at all. So it was really comforting to have other people through the podcast kind of bouncing ideas off of sending encouragement, having some accountability on those cold days was really helpful for sure. As far as the training goes, I mean, you guys definitely have some great insights, but you're pretty straightforward. You know, I was worried that when I signed up, I was like, what if they, you know, what if they have me skipping my easy days and instead doing yoga or something crazy? And I was like, then I'm not going to buy in. But, you know, it's all you guys are pretty, pretty much pitches down the middle, as far as I can tell. Right. I'm great workouts and really challenging workouts, too. So I've been nothing but happy with with how how the training cycle is gone right up until April 16th. It was perfect. But yeah, very happy with it.

I always say there's training results and racing results. And in an ideal world, those things sing happy song together, but they don't always. Unfortunately, in this case, they didn't.

It happens. I just have to not get too anxious to come back and get injured so that I come back the right way. And I think I just have to set my mind as though like act as if things went well and treat myself as though I ran a 245 or better and be ready to crush it in December. That's kind of where I'm going from here.

And you know, Lee, that's something that in any other race distance other than the marathon, I would tell people, do not do that, do not do that. But in the marathon, we have to because there's just no way after the kind of effort that you put in at Boston that we can regroup, retool, get ourselves ready four weeks, six weeks later. The things are not going to always line up. I've done it occasionally for people who wanted to get a Boston Qualifier. I've allowed that to happen, but you just have, but it almost always goes wrong. And you just have to believe. And that's one thing that Chris and I can tell you from our experiences coaching thousands of runners who have been in the same position that you have, is that you are what your training indicated you were ready for. Now, you do have to earn that, right? You don't get to just get it, right? You have to earn it. But you don't have to adjust training significantly. In fact, in my opinion, it's, do we double down? How much do we double down? How much further down do we go? What steps do we want to take from there? But we'll save that for another discussion.

Yeah, you and I are of the same mind, because I was thinking the same thing. I'm like, am I just going to repeat the last 20-week cycle, or do I ramp it up a little bit and see if I can shoot for bigger things?

What do you think we're going to say?

So if I was being my own coach, we're going to ramp it up. I'm probably going to get more miles in this summer and be ready to hit some more ambitious things in the fall. That's my guess.

I would say the same. I'm pretty sure Chris would.

So, Amanda, a similar question in terms of were there adjustments for you adapting to the programming and how did you roll with that?

Yeah, there were some adjustments. I loved the workouts, I will say. I think I before was doing workouts that were kind of monotonous and same week in, week out. And so I loved having the different workouts. They were challenging, but fun. And I loved having the accountability to do those workouts. So that was the adjustment, I think, for me, is before there was no one really checking in on me, if I was doing it or not.

The group wouldn't let you not know what's going on. It's like that was awesome to see all the posts. What about for you, Greg? I know we exchanged a bunch of emails before you got into the program about your ambition. Why did you have to make any adjustments to get into it? And what did you learn through that?

Yeah, so my training with the group was totally different. I had never been coached before. I'd never had any like formal running training. I've always been like trial and error, which would end up with an injury or a good result. 50-50 pretty much on how it would work out. And I'd be reading off of a piece of paper. I think for my last marathon, I bought like a training plan off the internet for $10 or something, and I followed it step by step, but I didn't have any feedback. And the group gave me that feedback. And having runners that have experience to spot check you and tell you you're on the right path or on an off day to keep your head up was just a huge benefit to me. The constant feedback loop was really beneficial.

Did any of you... I don't think any of you really struggled with injury. I know Lee had a pretty perfect cycle. Amanda, did you have any injury issues or points where you questioned whether or not you could handle the load?

No, and that was one of the things that was really great to take in to my race in my head, is just that I didn't miss any workouts. I didn't struggle with injury. I was able to really kind of check all the boxes on the way there, so I felt confident in my training in that way.

I think we were... I ended up having... Early in January, it was a down week, a drop week, and on a short, long run on a Sunday, I could tell when it happened. I stepped on the outside of my foot the wrong way, and I knew immediately that it would either be nothing or it would be something really annoying. So I ended up having a strained tendon in my foot for a lot of January, actually all the way into early March, but it was not bad enough that I couldn't run on it. It was probably a three or a four on the scale of one to ten, and then I kept hearing you say, blood flow equals recovery and keep moving. And just one day I was out for a run and I was like, wow, my foot doesn't hurt anymore. So that was also, I thought I was going to have to pull the plug in at some point in January from the training because the history I've had with injury, it just doesn't usually get better that quickly. So hearing your feedback on that was huge also. So I just didn't push it on certain days that it felt bad, but I got the miles in and it was really helpful.

Yeah, movement equals blood flow equals healing. I say it all the time. Yep. So as you reflect on what you've learned and we'll start with Lee here. As you reflect on what you've learned through the cycle, through your goal race, what are the key takeaways that we haven't already maybe discussed that you take to the next cycle?

That's a good question. So be ready for anything. I think it was in the podcast about dealing with disappointment. I don't think Amanda or Greg are going to mention this because they had great races. But you had the Buddhist monk quote that said, you are not guaranteed an outcome, right? So you shouldn't start in on a process because of the outcome, but instead just for the joy of the process itself. I wish I could remember that quote exactly. Maybe you do it. I'll jump into it and I'll be ready to go. But I think I have to not be afraid of a bad race day. And I certainly have been inundated with that. I've been sort of hit with that now. And I think if I get a bad race day in December, I'll know exactly how to deal with it. So I can train without that fear. I'll just say, OK, I'm ready to go no matter what happens. And if that doesn't mean I hit my goal time, then that's fine. There's always another marathon around the corner, and I'll hit the next one after that.

Lee, the most amazing thing about that feeling is there's another side to it, which it creates much calmer start line experiences, because you had a pretty good start line experience, because all you can do is just laugh at the absurdity of the situation that you were in. Absolutely. That's not always the case, especially if you're someone who is into the command performance idea, which I know you are, and someone who invested a whole lot into the process and into your intent with it. But I do think that you'll find at the next race when you line up, your experience going to that starting line and your experience on the starting line will be cooler, calmer, and much more focused. And you'll be in that mindset of just being able to take what the race gives and knowing in those narrow windows of opportunity that occur, you'll be fully ready to do it. And you'll be able to go through the things you need to go through to get that final result. And you know you're worthy now, right? And you know you're a badass, as we talked about. It's just how badass are you?

Look, I mean, there's pressure in getting a good day, too, right? I mean, if it's 50 degrees and calm and slightly overcast, that's a perfect day. And you have to be at the start line going, man, I better not waste this day, right? There's a different kind of pressure that comes from that. But I think you have to be ready for either one. Otherwise, it's going to be trouble.

I had the perfect day in Houston and felt that pressure for sure. It's like, well, if I can't do it today, then I'm never going to be able to do it.

And your statement of purpose came right into play, Chris, the same way, because you had to go back there and you went to who you were doing it for, your why, as we talk about this on this podcast all the time. And you were able to get through those few moments that were really where it was touch and go.

Yep. One thing I want to also just talk about with you, Lee, is there were some times, and we called you out on it on the podcast, where you're one of the few in the group that had the real background in speed and shorter distances that would come out and rear its ugly head sometimes in workouts where you got a little crazy. Any lessons from that in terms of sometimes having to hold back in this game?

Yeah, I mean, especially getting a little older. I'm 41, and if I go out too hard and destroy a workout, that can ruin my week in a hurry, right? I mean, those little sore days don't go away in six hours like they did when I was 21, right? So you definitely have to be careful, and I appreciated you guys calling me out, especially on that 10K workout the week before the marathon, 10 days before the marathon, because even with your warning, my first two splits were just way too fast, and I could just hear you guys in my head the whole time, and I thought to myself, man, I'm going to have to post this workout, and I don't want to get called out in another podcast.

Yeah, it was a preemptive call out warning, so that's awesome. Amanda, what about you? What lessons do you take away from this training block and race experience?

I learned a lot. I feel like this training block, I learned there's no shortcuts. You just have to do the work. That staying strong mentally is just as important as staying strong physically. So really worked on pushing doubt aside throughout the entire training cycle. And then learning to suffer better. I think that there are a lot of times, especially there are certain workouts that I can think back to specifically that I thought that I couldn't do anymore. But just finding that gear, leaning into the suffering, and then completing it, and then letting that work out kind of helped build my confidence through the cycle.

You know, Amanda, they just announced this week the location of the 2020 Marathon Olympic Trials. I don't know if you saw that. It's going to be in Atlanta. We were going back and forth with you. We kind of avoided, we didn't go to this topic with you last time, but I think we're going to do it now because why not?

Oh, he's going to do it.

You know, as we ran down those questions of, you know, can you run 25X or whatever, you showed some confidence there, and rightly so for some big goals that might be lingering. Is there a trials goal out there for you?

I think that would be a very cool thing to happen.

Yeah, Greg, call her out.

I mean, it's a big, hairy, audacious goal, right? It's something, yeah, I mean, I think that would be awesome, and I want to continue to work and plug away and do all the work that I can do to see if that's a possibility.

And I want you to know as a person who I coach a lot of women and have coached men to Olympic trials qualifiers and also to people who are currently, who started further behind than you are now, who are now in the, you know, who run, you know, really close to 250, even in terrible weather conditions. It's not, putting that out there isn't something that puts pressure on you, as long as you're clear in your reasons for wanting it, right? And, you know, our experience with you on the podcast training group has been just seeing your balance and seeing the kind of person that you are the way you live your running life. You don't, it doesn't have to be a big, bold declarative statement. It just has to be what you just said. And if you stay the course, do the work, consistently stay healthy and consistently stay focused on the thing that you want, and you let that ember burn. It doesn't have to be a fire. It just has to be an ember. It'll take you so much further than you know. And it's also an amazing gift. The men in our groups don't really ever have the opportunity. They're just so much further away from those goals than some of our women are. And that's a privilege, but it's also a responsibility. So I just wanted you to know that it's good. Making that statement is not just a scary thing. It's a really good thing. And you'll be surprised over time how beneficial that'll be. Now, I might not have called you out on a podcast like this, the way that Chris did, believe it or not, but I appreciate that he did. He actually shocked me when he did that. We had talked about, months ago, we talked about whether or not that was reasonable. And I was like, damn straight, it's reasonable. I want to talk about it right now. But I've also learned that you got to work towards it. And I think you knew at some point in time, we were going to corner you and poke a stick at you, right? Yeah.

I didn't think it would be on a podcast.

Well, now the world knows. I do think, Steve, that there's a conversation to be had offline with Amanda about the steps towards that, if it's a real goal. And I believe that it is. And, you know, because time is short for 2020, at least. And so that's not to add pressure, just to say we need to be very specific about the steps that we take along the way. And if we want to have a big shot for that, we've got to think about it just a little bit in terms of planning and planning of where it could play out. So anyway, that's a conversation to take offline, but I'm glad I was able to pin you down on it here. And you got to know that you got two believers, at least in Steve and I, and I believe probably Lee and Greg are on the same boat too. All right, Greg, so for you, what lessons do you take away from this experience?

I take away that it's a lot more enjoyable doing this, going after this training with people. I've done all of my training alone. It's been very salutary and running a lot of hours by myself. And just to be able to have the times, the workouts posted and everybody being able to see them and comment and just the feedback, that's been huge for me. And then going into the race day, when you, Chris, when you suggested that Amanda and I run together, I really, like I said, I've done all of my miles pretty much by myself. I've run races with people, but we've never been on the same, at the same paces. And so I would go off and do my own thing and meet people at the finish line. But actually going out and running a race with somebody was like super enjoyable. And it was, it just made the time go by so much faster. And for us to be able to check in with each other, just looking over and we're good, right?

We're good.

And then like, and keep going without having to be stressing, looking at your watch every two seconds, knowing that we're keeping the pace together. I mean, that was, that was so helpful. And especially in a small race like Amanda and I ran, we mentioned on the, on the, I mentioned on the Facebook page that there were a couple of times that it was just us out there. Like there were 10 or 12 people ahead of us, but they were a good distance ahead of us. And we were running through this state park that was totally empty. And if we weren't out there together, my concentration would have been gone. I would have been, I would have been in the woods mentally. And I might have even got lost out there. I don't know. So it was, it was just really pleasurable to have throughout training people there. And then on race day, really helpful to have Amanda out there.

You know, guys, when you guys told me you were running that race, I summered, like, a month for, like, eight years in the Rehoboth Beach area. And I did, I was a competitive runner through all of those years. And I knew you guys were in for something different. It's, it's, there's not a lot out there, you know, and I knew that's not a lot of people out there, especially this time of year. So kudos to you guys for, I almost mentioned something about it, but then I was like, my experience might be different from yours, especially on a race day. But you know, it's a, I would train there in the summers and it was very, very difficult, but it's, it's, I think that those, that's a key component that I think, you know, in this, in all group training programs, it's really magical when people are able to go travel to destination races with the people that they train with. And this is a real concern Chris and I had about the podcast training group, and whether those things would make or take, and it would work if it would work. And the fact that the two of you were able to make that happen again, it's just another, another thing that it really encourages us in this process of seeing how much an impact we can make with these, with this potential podcast training group and how that plays out and how we divide it up and how we group people and how we do all those things. We don't know yet. We'll, we'll be thinking through it. We'll be asking people's advice through that process. But the fact that you guys were able to take it live and make it work together in that environment was so encouraging to Chris and I. I mean, I don't think I don't know that you guys even know how much you have given us in our process of thinking about what this could be. We couldn't have asked for a better group of people. And we couldn't have asked for people who were more willing to adopt the warrior ethos that we try to implement. But we try to encourage everybody to do.

It was also. I'm sorry.

No, I was just going to say, specifically to the group and not being physically with people as a mom of young kids and a husband that travels, it's hard for me to physically be somewhere at the same time for workouts, week in, week out. And so this group, even though we weren't all together, we were doing the same workouts. And, you know, some people would do them on Tuesday mornings or Tuesday night or Wednesday mornings. And that didn't matter. Nobody was missing out on being together because we were still doing them together. So that was an aspect that I really enjoyed is that flexibility of having the cohesiveness of the group, even though we weren't physically together.

Yeah, I was going to say something similar as well. That's my schedule is different every day. I never know if I'll be able. I try to get up in the morning and get my run in. But with a with a child at home, a six year old home, and my wife in nursing school, but studying around the clock, it's really difficult to if I don't get that morning run in my I might throw my whole running schedule off for push it back a day or whatever it may be. But it was always like running with with the group, even though I was doing workouts alone and on race day, it was just awesome to have Bob and Amanda there. And we all had our rogue gear on. So we were really like, really representing as a team out there, which felt great, too.

You know, it's I got an e-mail this week from somebody who ran a PR at Coastal Delaware. And she mentioned seeing the Rogue, the Rogue logo out there on several runners and and was just she was thanking us for some things from the podcast. But but she was like, that was so cool to see the Rogues out there at Coastal Delaware. And so thanks to you guys for representing. That was that's pretty awesome.

Thank you.

Now, one thing that fascinated me, you know, we've done some virtual programming before through online, other online mechanisms. But we've never and we've always been able to convey training information, but we've never been able to build the community and accountability that we were able to build with this group, which is as much a credit to the group members as it is to Steve and I. But I'll take this to Lee. One of the things that to me was fascinating as you guys were posting workouts is it seemed like there's momentum building, you know, somebody would get it done first and post their workout. And then somebody else would go next. And sometimes they hit it and sometimes they didn't, but everybody would learn from it. And so what was it like, even though you're not physically running with this group, you're still connected to the fact that they're doing it or that they've done it before. What was that like for you, Lee?

It was actually, you know, as Amanda and Greg alluded to, it's really helpful to know that you are going to post that out there and you are accountable for it and you're going to show the world. Good or bad, I know I had one or two bad, some stinkers out there. And even though I wasn't super proud of them, I felt that it was just as important to post the bad ones as the good ones. So that, you know, if somebody else had a bad day, you know, it was going to be okay. But it was really, especially with the weather we had, and I'm forgetting who it was that posted that ridiculous photo after they came in from like 10 degrees below, you know, 5 in the morning. But, you know, I felt like, well, if they're going to get out there in this cold weather, then I better get out there too. And there was just a lot of camaraderie. And I think it showed too, you know, when I met up with some of the other podcasts before the Boston Marathon, you know, I mean, Ron Romano and I were talking like we were old friends. We'd never met each other, you know. We just jumped right into conversations. It's really...

I think Ron Romano talks to Christmas trees like they've always been friends.

It feels so special. But, you know, I mean, it was pretty easy to... And I think, you know, before we got on, started recording, Amanda was like, hey, you know, I've got relatives in the St. Louis area. Maybe we'll go for a run. And I think that's really good. You know, all three of us have kids that are about the same age. And boy, we can't get together. Whenever I go buy a pair of shoes at the local running store, they always ask me to meet up for group runs. And I'm like, well, as long as you can be at my house at 415 in the morning, we'll do a group run. But otherwise, you're going to have to wait another five or six years before the, you know, once the kids don't care about me anymore. So yeah, I just found it really, really nice to feel like I was part of a team again. It's been a long time since that's been the case. So it was, it was good.

So now we're going to get into the blatant PSA portion of this.

We haven't been doing that already.

Sorry, Chris.

Anyway, you can sign up here.

I guess I just wanted to hear from each of you on one final question, which is that if you had advice for somebody either already signed up for the program or considering the podcast program, what would you say? We'll start with Greg. We'll go in reverse order.

I think that it's definitely, definitely beneficial, especially if you have a specific goal that you want to reach. Goals and targets are easier to hit when you have other people working with you. And that was definitely, definitely clear to me, especially on a few workouts. I would hit goals in my old training program. I'd hit the paces and everything else. And I still would have that doubt in my mind. And I think in the Canova K workout, the second one, Steve told me that I was going to be going for 125 at New York City half this this past March. And I was planning on really staying closer to 130, which was my safe, my safe number and my previous PR. And so he told me to go for 125. And then I saw Ron Romano. I ran into him randomly right before the race. Like we were there are thousands of people and I look up and I'm tying my shoe and I look up and he's standing right there. And like Lee said, we're like old buddies, like just talking, talking and listening 100 miles a minute. And it's just incredible to be able to have that group dynamic and the positive feedback and people telling you that you can you can do this and believe in yourself. Because doing it alone, you're kind of giving yourself the best. You're giving yourself a good shot. But you also have a number in your head that maybe acts like a governor on an engine and you can't go lower than that number. And that's I think I've been running with that governor in place while I was training on my own that is taken off by the coaches and by the other.

I love it.

Thank you, Greg. Thoughts from you, Amanda?

Yeah, I definitely agree with that. I think just having having the camaraderie, having the encouragement, having other people just believe in you, tell you you can do it or give you advice or have you thought about this? Just kind of running all those things by other people is so helpful. And I would say that not for people not to let fear stop them to like if you, I don't know, for whatever reason, you're scared of joining a team or you don't want to put your goals out there, whatever, not to let that stop you that you should you should try it anyways, because it definitely exceeded my expectations.

And on that note, Amanda, I did also want to mention that we happened to have the three of you on that are kind of on that three hour and below into the spectrum, but we had all the way from there up to Jaime, who ran 440 at his race, so huge range. And that was one of the cool things to see was you guys being able to bond where it didn't really matter what your paces were. It was just, I'm here, I'm showing up, I'm doing the work too, and we're all in this together. Lee, thoughts from you to close it out?

Yeah, my thoughts are just sign up. I mean, if you're out there and you're going to run a marathon, you're going to work your ass off, you might as well give yourself every possible advantage you can get a hold of. And unless you've got Alberto Salazar buried in your backyard, this is the best you're going to do. Chris and Steve are awesome and the training group is awesome. You should really do this. I mean, as Amanda said, it far exceeded my expectations. I'm going to be signing up with you guys again as soon as you tell me how to do it.

Awesome. And you'll have teammates if you sign up in Lee, Amanda and Greg, which is exciting too. So thank you guys for joining. We really appreciate it. This has been awesome to both catch up on and reflect on those purpose conversations, but also to help with this blatant PSA in our next podcast training group.

In lieu of advertisements.

You get that, but only because we want to help you get better. So thanks, guys. So there we go. A little shameless self-promotion at the end, Steve. It's been a privilege coaching that group, those three and all of them. We've had about 26 in our podcast training program for this first go at it, and it has so far exceeded our expectations that we've shocked ourselves.

Well, and we shocked them. I mean, this is an ongoing story with Rogue. We're pretty damn good at over-delivering. We do a good job of that. And this podcast, we definitely did it. And I think the key thing I took away from this whole experience, Chris, as all of you already heard, we're excited that this is scalable and that it's able to be done in other places. And hopefully you guys really did hear how it can be super impactful for people who can't get to either don't have good training groups in their area or who, even if they do have good training groups in their area, just have lives that won't allow them to sync up. And so that part's the coolest part to me, Chris, is that there's an answer for anybody out there now, in my opinion, who wants to get faster, who wants to get a Boston Qualifier, who wants to get a personal record, who wants to stretch their limits, and who sees the command performances as valuable. And if you listen to this podcast, and you're still listening to it this far in, and our numbers are indicating, Chris, that people are listening to us, we had our biggest month this month that we've had ever, then you can join in, and it's good stuff. We're doing really good stuff, and there's a great level of community, and we get results too. So community, authenticity, results, I mean, what more can we ask for?

So let's talk some details for those that are interested in checking it out. First of all, you can go to our website, roguerunning.com, forward slash podcast training. It's also under the training button. If you're looking at the top menu, you can get all the updated details on the next version of the podcast training group, which we're going to be starting on May 7th. We've got all of that listed, and we also have the ability for you to listen to a sample episode from that podcast training cycle. If you want to do so, you can go to that page and click into the link I have there and listen to a sample episode to see what it's like. This time we are opening it up to more potential race goals, which we're super excited about. We're going to have two different tracks for the program this time, starting on May 7th with a focus for races in the September to December time frame. And so we're going to have two tracks. One track is going to focus on those that are doing late summer or early fall races, half marathon or marathon, so we're adding half marathon to the mix. And so track one will be targeting half marathons or marathons in that late September to early November time frame. And you guys will be basically getting into your specific program work or race distance work starting in May, because that's the time you would need to start for that. The second track, track two, will be those that are targeting later fall or early winter half marathons and marathons, looking at the December, January time frame for your target races. In particular, we've got a big group going to the California International Marathon in Sacramento on December 2nd, including several members of the current podcast training group that are going to be moving forward with us to that. So if you're interested in going to a destination race with us in Sacramento, that would be an option for you if you're looking at December 2nd. But basically anybody in that December, January kind of race time frame marathon or half marathon will be on track two. And for that group, we're going to be starting not in your specific race distance training work, but with what we're calling a speed development track, where you're going to do some base building, but also work on form efficiency and speed to essentially try to improve your wheels a little bit before you move up to the race specific work, which will start in late July, early August. So we're hoping to accommodate a bunch of different options in that. So some of you might say, hey, I just want to I just want to do the 5K, 10K work. And you can start in May and do that until later in the summer. Others might be doing the Chicago Marathon or Marine Corps in New York or something like that. And you can jump in and get on track one and start your sort of race specific work in May 7th. And then the others can that are looking at those late, late fall or early winter races can jump in with us on that sort of speed development track. And then we'll shift you into race specific work a little bit later. We're hoping giving those options will open this up to more people who can who can give it a shot. And then, of course, within each program, we've got three different levels that we target so that that more first timer kind of person or first time marathoner could jump in and have a level to work at. We've got intermediate and advanced levels as well for those that are more focused on getting a certain time or getting a PR. With the programming, you get your training macro, and then we give you a weekly training podcast that's separate from our main podcast on the member page for that group that basically gives you an overview. It's usually 30 minutes of extra content with an overview of the workouts for the week and also usually some tips and other thoughts from Steve and I about where you might be in your training and how you might navigate the arrows that might be coming at that part of the cycle. Of course, you also get access to our private Facebook group that Lee, Amanda, and Greg alluded to that basically becomes that place to share and build accountability within the group. And that's been where a lot of the magic has happened in our group this time for sure. And that camaraderie has been built through that virtual platform that's been fun to see play out in Boston and Coastal Delaware when they've been able to actually meet each other in person. So that's what you get.

We get one more thing this cycle, Chris. They get a little wrinkle in mental training. We'll be adding some, those of you who have been hot on our mental training podcasts, we've given you some sort of more big picture ways to implement some of the mental training techniques in your running. But in this podcast, we'll also be adding a new wrinkle, which we will have a three or four specific mental training technique practical application places so that you all will get a chance to see how developing a mantra and using a mantra in the context of your training cycle might help and a wide and a number of other things. Chris, we haven't decided exactly the number of those mental training episodes we'll do or how we'll do them. But suffice it to say, it's the first time that we'll be offering that on the podcast. And it'll be worked through in real time, both live in our workouts here at Rogue and also with the podcast training group. So that's another little exciting wrinkle that we're excited about having in the play.

Yep. And how do you get all of that? You can go to that page and sign up. We're going to be bringing the price in. Basically, essentially the same price that we charged before. This time we're making it a little bit easier so that just a $40 a month charge that you'll sign up for and that charge will continue as long as you're with us in the programming. And when you want to cancel or if you find that you're not benefiting from the work, you can drop or change at any time. So we're going to keep that flexible, but also make it easy so it's just $40 a month, easy to get in. And then you can stay with us on the journey as long as you want and drop off when you want as well.

There is one other little piece of this puzzle, Chris, that's a little different from what we do in Rogue normally is you got to sign up by the 31st of May. We are shutting that group down. There will be no jumping back in. We will have another CIM specific cycle or a late fall cycle that we will create for folks. So if you are running a December marathon or a January or February marathon, there will be another option to get started back up. We don't think you should do that. We think you should jump in with our speed development phase. But just know that we are going to put a hard cap on this on the 31st of May because we can't have people coming and going. We had a lot of requests for that this last cycle, didn't we, Chris? Where people wanted to jump in. And no, you got to strike, get it while it's hot.

So you can sign up between now and May 31st. But we'll be kicking off those episodes on May, or the week of May 7th, so that you are ready to rock and roll. So that's the update. If you have questions or aren't sure if it's right for you, then certainly email me, chris at roguerunning.com. Check out more information, as I said, at roguerunning.com forward slash podcast training. You can sign up there. You can also see my email there, and listen to a sample episode there. So check that out, and we'd love to have you join us. We've got, just to give you some perspective, this time we had 26 members from five different countries. I know we've got a few other countries that are going to be jumping in. We've got somebody from potentially Macedonia joining us, and Thailand joining us. So we're going worldwide.

We need to actually put that on the website somewhere. Renegades Worldwide, is it on there? We need to get it on that page.

It's not, but we did, yeah, we called ourselves, that group decided to call itself the Rogue Renegades Worldwide. But anyway, point being, it's a big group, a cool community that is now global, and we'd love to have you be a part of it. So check all of that out and let us know if you have questions. All right, so that's it for today's episode. This has been episode 72 of the Running Rogue podcast. As always, you can check us out at roguerunning.com or on Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.