Hey, everybody, this is episode 130 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is Chris coming at you from Austin, Texas, for this intro on a Memorial Day weekend. I am very, very excited to introduce my guest today, and we're going to cut straight to it today. I'm going to get to my interview with the great Emily Sisson, who just had her marathon debut in London, running a 223 for the second fastest debut marathon ever by an American. And now she occupies the seventh fastest time all time for American women in the marathon. So she announced herself as one of the favorites for the Olympic Trials in Atlanta next February, with this result beating her teammate Molly Huddle in the race in London. Molly also had a PR on the day. But Emily's race was just really, really strong, again, running a 223, running a slight negative split, meaning the second half of that race was faster than the first. So a perfectly executed race for her. Of course, she has a strong running resume already, but I believe has often been overshadowed by other American women in the very stacked group of women that are now competing very well at distances from 800 meters all the way to the Marathon. Emily maybe isn't one that you know about or is top of mind, given the Shalanes of the world and the Emma Coburns and the Jenny Simpsons of the world. And if you didn't know Emily Sisson's name, you should definitely know it. And I think you'll become a fan after listening to this interview with her. She's just a really solid person. And obviously, really, really fast, just to give you some highlights from her resume. She was a four time state champion, cross country athlete in high school, a two time NCAA champion in the 5000 meters, winning both the indoor and outdoor 5K during her last year at Providence, where she was coached by the great Ray Tracy, who also coaches Molly Huddle. And then, of course, as an American athlete in the elite world, she's done very, very well making a world championship team in 2017. She's also won several US road championships, most recently in the last nine, ten months has had a really, really stellar run where she finished first in the 5K, the US 5K champs on the road in New York last November, then ran six seconds slower than the American record in the half at Houston in January. Followed that with the third fastest ever 10, 000 meter time by an American at Stanford in her build to London. And then, of course, ran the 223 in London. So not only does she have amazing range, but she's beaten some really big names over the last nine or 10 months. And again, was only six seconds behind Molly Huddle's American record in the half marathon. And so the accolades are certainly there, but you'll also find that she's a really cool calm down to earth person. And I think you'll enjoy this interview with her. So with that as a quick intro, let's chat with Emily Sisson. Welcome, Emily Sisson, to the show. How are you doing today, Emily?

I'm good. Thanks for having me.

I heard you had a little challenge with your workout today, finding a track in Phoenix. What was that all about?

Oh, I don't know. I think it's not just in Phoenix, but I was talking to a friend all over the US. I feel like lately it's harder and harder to find tracks open to the public. And I guess we were spoiled when we were in Providence. We just used our college's track for working out. But yeah, here it's been a little bit more of a challenge, but we figured it out. So we got the workout in.

Where were you? And who kicked you off? Do they not know who you are?

No, it's more like the maintenance crew was on working on it, and they locked the gates. And I think schools are getting a little bit more strict about it, which makes sense. It's like security issues. And I think one of the tracks might have been vandalized or something, like the previous year, because we had no problems like a year ago. And I don't know what changed because I had multiple tracks I could go to for workouts. And now I'm like, I just need one. Just need to find one. But yeah, so we figured it out. We got it in. So yeah, it worked out fine.

And you mentioned before you came on that this was your first track workout back post London, and you're racing the New York Mini 10K, the US 10K Road Championships here in a couple of weeks. Is that right? That's coming up pretty quick here.

So I feel like we're just building back into it, and then I'm racing again in two weeks. So it's kind of funny. We're just kind of going to like see how it goes, but I'm excited to get back racing. I like took a bit of a break after London, and I'm one of those runners that actually like, I love like my breaks for like four or five years. Like I know some runners are like, oh no, like I don't want to take one. I'm like, I'll take one. I'll enjoy my four or five days. Like I worked really hard. I'm going to enjoy it. But then after like four or five days, I'm like, no, like I really want to get back running now. Like part of the great thing of having a break for me is like by the end of it or even four or five days in, I'm like, I really want to get back running. It kind of ignites that fire again in me. And I'm just like super motivated getting into the next, I guess like work phase or whatever. So we're kind of just building back into it now.

Nice. So let's go back though. We'll come back around to post marathon recovery a little later, but let's talk about your history in the sport. It's funny, your name actually came up on my last podcast or episode 128 with, I was talking to David Epstein. He has a new book out called Range, which is basically the science of generalization versus specialization and how a lot of the best athletes and contributors in our world actually come from generalist backgrounds versus specialist backgrounds. And I was listening to the Kerry Tollebsen podcast and you talked about how, yeah, you started early, relatively early in your running career, but you were also doing a lot of different things as well, including soccer. So talk about your origins in the sport.

Yeah, no, I did actually start pretty young, I'd say. I was probably like 12 or 13 when I got into track. And my dad was almost, cause my dad was the runner in the family. My mom was a gymnast and he was almost a little wary of me getting into running so young. Cause he's like, I was a runner. I know it's a great sport, but it can be quite intense at times. So he was like, him and my mom really encouraged my sisters and I from a young age just to do all like different sports, just try everything, just do it, like find like the joy of doing everything. You want to try every different sport. So when I first got into running, they were like, well, keep playing soccer, keep doing the things you want to do, like your other interests, because you're so young, you don't need to just pick one sport. But then I really liked it. So I kind of just been running since then, ran competitively through high school and college and now even. But yeah, I know I loved, I pretty much tried every sport there was when I was a kid. And I was pretty bad at most of them, but I did enjoy them. And soccer was my all time favorite. But I did enjoy trying everything really.

When did you start playing soccer?

I was really young. I was probably like seven or eight maybe. I don't know. I'm trying to remember. Probably around that age. Yeah.

And how long did you play until you just focused on running?

Yeah, probably until I was like 14 or 15 maybe. So like when I went into high school, I decided just to stick to running because I think, I can't remember if my high school had a rule, you could only play one sport per season or something. And I wanted to do cross country in the fall and track in the spring. So I decided just to stick with running. But I played soccer for like seven or eight years or something.

Yeah. Yeah, I played it at a young age as well. And I always tell people now that that was the best aerobic development that place that I could have on a soccer field at that age.

Yeah, you're just running around, especially if you played in the midfield, which I feel like most runners I know that played soccer were midfielders. And you're just running back and forth all over the place. Yeah, no, it's a great workout.

So we were talking a little bit before you came on about being a soccer fan. Your husband Shane is Irish. Sounds like you guys are watching a little bit of Premier League here and there. And how do you experience soccer now?

Yeah, no, I was a huge fan when I was younger. That was my dream was to go to college on a soccer scholarship. My idol was Mia Hamm growing up. My dad brought me to a Women's World Cup game when I was really young. I just was a huge fan of the sport. And now I'm not as diehard of a fan, but I still follow it. And my husband already always has the Premier League on in our house. And he's a big Arsenal fan. And he's gone into our local soccer team, and we've gone to a couple of games. So I still love following it. I'm not as into it as I was obviously when I was a kid, but I still really like it.

I wanted to give a shameless plug for the US women competing in the World Cup coming up soon. June 7th, I think, is the first game in France. France plays, I believe, it's South Korea on the 7th, and then the US has their first game June 11th against Thailand. And so for US fans, check that out. Do you follow the national team at all?

We were going to follow the World Cup. I don't follow it as closely as probably the Die Hard fans, but we were going to follow the World Cup. We were talking about it yesterday. We were like, well, what day does it start? Because we want to be watching it. But we're pretty excited. You must be really excited since you're going.

I'm very excited. I'm going to France to see to see. Well, the semis in the final, so fingers crossed that the US make it that far. But I am a Die Hard. And I was mentioning to you before, and I want to mention to the fans as well, that there's a great podcast out called Throwback by Grant Wall. His last name is spelled W-A-H-L that takes us back to the 1991 Women's World Cup, which is the very first one. And the US actually won that one. You went to the 1999 World Cup. Anyway, it's a great history on women's soccer, women in sport, and some of the challenges that they went through rising up in a sport that was dominated by men. And just like in running, there was a lot of countries where soccer was actually banned because it was deemed to be unsafe for women, which is crazy, just like running was back in the day. And so it's a pretty cool story.

Yeah, it sounds really fascinating.

But you were a fan of Mia Hamm growing up, saw her, I would assume, in the 1999 World Cup.

Yeah, I'm trying to... I remember the game, I remember being there, because I was like seven years old, so I was pretty bad at the time. I'm pretty sure she played, but I'm not positive. I think they were playing Nigeria, so I'm not sure. Yeah, I'm trying to remember. I don't remember the specifics, but I remember the atmosphere. I remember being there with my dad and my friends and just loving it. So, yeah, I'd have to look up that game, actually.

Yeah, what did you learn as watching somebody like that as a kid?

I think I just was really inspired just from seeing such a talented female athlete that I could look up to as a kid. Because, yeah, I'm amazed, actually. You said 1991 was the first Women's World Cup, but I guess that kind of makes sense timeline-wise. But just having a strong female athlete to look up to for me was pretty incredible. It got me really excited about playing sports and wanting to do well and being competitive. From such a young age, even I remember being competitive in... What do you call that PE thing every school does? The Presidential Fitness Awards. Did you do that? No, I remember I got really competitive doing that, and I got made fun of from some of the boys because I beat them in whatever the mile or whatever we ran. I think it was a mile. And apparently that wasn't cool. And I was like, well, I don't care. I think having someone like that to kind of look up to from such a young age is probably a pretty positive thing.

I was just looking it up. The US played in Nigeria in Chicago's Soldier Field. They won 7-1. Mia Hamm scored in the 20th minute. So there you go. 65, 000 people watched that game.

Yeah, I remember being there. My dad still has the tickets. Yeah, it was him and a couple of my soccer friends and their dads. We all went. Yeah, it was a blast to remember it.

That's cool. That's really cool. Did you look up to any women runners at that time?

No, I wasn't into running then. I didn't get into running until, I guess, like 12 or 13, but even then, not like.

What was your first running idol? Who or who was your first running idol?

I'm trying to think. I guess I would have been in high school, so I probably looked up to people like, definitely my current teammate, Molly. I remember meeting her at Foot Locker when I was 15 or whatever. So I definitely looked up to her a lot. And the Shlain Flanagan and Kara Gouchers of the Running World Tour always looked up to them. And then as I got older now, it's just so funny how I can look back in high school and be like, oh, Molly was someone I really looked up to, and now she's someone I train with. Just funny how things work out, I guess.

What's that like going from idol to teammate to somebody you're competing with?

Yeah, it was a funny transition, but it was a slow transition. So because even in college, I remember just seeing her around because like my coach coached her. So occasionally we'd see her like using the track or something. But yeah, no, I remember when I graduated and like we started running together, like intimidating is the wrong word because Molly is not like intimidating. She's very like open and like just like kind person to like run with. But I was intimidated to work out with her.

I don't know, Emily, she can be intimidating.

Well, yeah, but once you know her, it's like, I guess maybe if you, yeah, I don't know. I found her intimidating to work out with, definitely. She was just so far above me workout wise.

So, and you didn't beat her in a race till this year at Stanford in the 10K, and then of course, again, at London. How has that been like going from seeing this as somebody who, you know, is an idol who is seemingly unbeatable at US championships to running away from her on the track at Stanford?

Yeah, I mean, like I said, it was slow. Like when I first graduated, I was like terrified of jumping in her workouts. So Ray would do like, and I honestly just wasn't fit enough to do anything like what she was doing. So I think if she had like mile repeats, I would do like 1500 meters of them or something like that. And then like slowly over time, I started being able to do her workouts, but I was like kind of hanging on for dear life. And then like after like another year or so, then I was like, we'd show up to the tracks some days and I'd be like, okay, let me lead some of these. Like I got like slowly gained some confidence and just like slowly got fitter like over time. And then, yeah, no, I just spend like very gradual. But yeah, no, she working out with her gave me a lot of confidence as well. So that kind of helped kind of push me along, I guess.

But it does seem like there's a little bit of a mental shift of saying, okay, this person is a mentor who I really respect and I'm learning a lot from to giving yourself permission to beat her, right? I mean, there's a little bit of a mental switch there.

I think, yeah, I suppose. But I guess because, like I said, it was so gradual over time, it didn't really register as being like this big change to me because going from like not being able to do our workouts to doing them but finding them so hard to like not as hard to like, okay, I'm feeling a little bit better today, so I'll leave more of the workout, Molly, you like sit on my shoulder. Not that that normally happens for track workouts. She's usually stronger on the track. I'm a bit stronger tempo, like the tempo work, but still like I slowly just gained confidence over time. And then, yeah, and then the race, the races we did together, it just, I don't know, it never really felt like there was this big switch to me or big change, I guess.

So what, when you look at her as an athlete, what do you try to emulate?

I really like, there's a few things. I guess I went from also like looking up to her to like trying to learn from her, which is what I was doing. I feel like the first few years is like, well, what she's doing is clearly working. She's very successful. So kind of seeing how she handles herself. And I really like how she's very tough, yet also pretty humble. I feel like she, a lot of people probably don't realize how hard she works. I know at this level, everyone has to work hard. But I think sometimes people assume, oh, things must go perfectly for them because like she's running so well or something. And I've seen like firsthand things not go well, like getting sick at the wrong time or just having like a little niggle pop up when we're over in Europe or something like that. And seeing how she handles it and that she never really gives those excuses, even if she has an off day. There's no like, there's no pity party. There's no nothing. She's just very like humble, whether she runs really well or has something go wrong. And I really like that about her, how she's like such a tough, like gritty worker, but then she doesn't, isn't out there giving like excuses or being like, well, I could have run faster if this didn't happen. You know, she's just very humble and I like that a lot.

What advice did she have for you for the marathon?

She gave me a bit of advice over the buildup. I remember during the race thinking of something she said to me because we were racing in London. And I think before the race, she was like, just so you know, like in London, it's pretty common to be like out, like totally on your own for a good chunk of the race. So like, don't like panic or like go too fast too early on when that happens. Just kind of like be prepared. That might happen and don't get sucked into running like I think faster than what you're meant to. So I remember thinking that when there was this big break at half a mile and we were just all totally on our own.

So let's go back to one thing that's interesting to me about your career is that you moved to the roads pretty early. You won both indoor and outdoor 5Ks at Providence your last year there. But you were doing road championships as a junior, which I don't know, in my experience is a little bit unusual. And then obviously continue that after you graduated and then have had a really successful road career since. What was behind that thinking?

I remember doing road races my fifth year in college, I'm pretty sure. So yeah, I guess I did do them pretty young. I think I had that season off. I was redshirting my cross country season. So my coach was like, we'll just throw you in some road races. I kind of just like fell in love with it because they never had done a road race before. And it was something new to me because I'd only ever done track races. So I actually really enjoyed them and I felt like I had done pretty well. The ones he had thrown me in. So even now, I get really excited. Not that I don't get excited for track races, but I can get really excited for road races. Something about them, I don't know. I just really enjoy it.

Have you had a favorite road race so far?

I've had a lot of really cool experiences. I think the New York Roadrunners do a really good job putting on their races. And so running there always feels pretty special. I love those ones where you're running through Central Park or get to run through Times Square. Those have been pretty special.

Yeah, the 5K you won last fall.

Yeah, the 5K. I loved that one. Yeah, and then the two New York Havs I've done. London, I have to say, is probably my favorite because that's the most recent one, and I really enjoyed it.

Yes, as it should be.

Yeah, but apart from that, I think the New York Roadrunner races, I always enjoy those. Those are really fun.

So you decided to move to the marathon at 27. Molly actually didn't move to the marathon until she was 32. What was behind that decision making? Is that you making that call, or is Ray also saying, hey, Emily, I think you should go try this?

Yeah, I mean, Ray and I kind of just talked together, and we weren't super pressed to do it. We weren't like, oh, we have to do it right now. But we're like, well, going into 2020, you've shown you've done well in the roads, especially at the longer distances. So why don't we just try one this spring, see how it goes, and then it gives you the option to run that in the trials, or if it's not the right time, just go back to the 10K and try to make that team. So it was more like a timing thing. But no, I'm glad I did it, and I'm glad having done my first one now, I feel like hopefully I can stay healthy, hopefully have many more years of marathons and road racing.

Yeah, it went pretty well. I think that's an understatement. So let's talk a little bit about your preparation. What were the big shifts for you going from training for 10K on the track to shifting into marathon training?

I honestly thought it was going to be a much bigger shift than it was. I almost wanted to... I remember a couple years ago when the marathon came up, I was like, oh no, I'm not ready for that yet. That's way too much. I thought it would be this huge... I was really curious how my body was going to respond to it. But I was really pleasantly surprised because I think the training is very different in that... Not very different, but it's different in that we're on the track less. And since I feel like I'm naturally a bit better at tempo work, it kind of favored me a bit. So I actually felt a little bit better than I thought I would increasing my mileage and just doing less track work. So I still got on the track once probably every week to 10 or 12 days, which I do think was really important for me, and I'm glad that my coach did that. But I just wasn't getting on the track like twice a week like I used to. So I think that really worked for me. I felt actually better doing it that way than running 90 miles a week and doing two track workouts.

And you did bump your overall volume. It seems like I was reading you were at 90 before and maybe jumped into the 110 range, 115 range.

110 to 115, I'd say is probably average. It's kind of hard to add it up because our schedule isn't a seven-day schedule, it's a 12-day schedule. And we have an easy day after every 12 days or something like that. And then that easy day can totally throw off your weekly mileage. I normally don't count the easy day because I will count up and till it, and then I'll take the average because it's just such an outlier.

When you say easy day, what does that mean?

It's like five or six miles. So you have a week where the easy day doesn't fall in it and you could have your mileage be like 122 or something. But then if the easy day falls in it, then it's like, I don't know, it's like 108 or something. It's a big difference. But I do like having the easy day. I always felt like it was really good to reset and recharge for the next 12 days or whatever it was, 10 days.

Do you have off days, like complete off days as well?

No, the easy day was pretty good. If I ever felt like I needed an off day, I could have taken it. But luckily in that buildup, I don't think I ever needed to take one. I think I had to take an extra easy day once, but that was it.

So you're running every day. And I would assume you're having other recovery days. They're just not five or six miles, right? Within those 10 to 12 day cycles.

Yeah, yeah. We recover like three days in between workouts or something like that.

So what does a recovery day look like?

It's either a medium long run or a double. So like I run once in the morning and once in the evening.

And total volume on that kind of a day?

So I think my medium long run was anywhere from like 14 miles to like 16 or something. And then maybe 17. And then my like double days, I would probably do like I think 10 and 4 or 10 and 5. I did a couple of like 12 and 4s, but only two of those. I think. Yeah, something like that.

What? And I was listening again to the Carrie Thompson podcast. You said you went up to 22 mile long runs, which is a lot, right? When you're moving up in distance. But as you said in that podcast, it's not the whole distance you're covering. So that's a little strange.

Yeah, it's really strange to me.

As I coach adult athletes who are doing the same thing, we might do 22 miles. Sometimes we'll do 24, but never typically 26. And they always ask that same question. Well, why? How is this possible? How can I cover 26 if I'm only running 22? How did you wrap your head around that?

Yeah, no, I think I did 23 once, but 22 is my regular long run. And yeah, I remember thinking that was so strange because I've never done a race before where I haven't run that distance in practice. And even in the race, it hit me at one point. I'm like, this is the furthest I've ever run. But we were nearly on our feet for the same amount of time we were in London for those long runs, I think. So I think that's what Ray said. When I brought that up to him, I was like, Ray, I've never run that distance. He's like, this is on your feet for nearly that long. So I think that's... And he was right. I think that training worked out pretty well. I felt pretty good doing it, and felt like we never were overreaching. But it was definitely weird to me. And I remember saying that to my husband. I'm like, I've never run this distance before. And finding that so strange. But then I was like, well, whatever.

It is weird, though, having been there myself a long time ago when I debuted in the marathon, to think I'm gonna go further than I've ever gone before. It's sort of the unknown. You don't know what's gonna happen on the other side of that.

No, exactly. It was just a big mystery before. And I remember people kept asking me before the race, are you nervous? What are you feeling? And I'm like, I'm more just really curious how all this works. I think my tempos were 12 miles and I feel really good doing them, but I have to more than double that for the race. And I'm like, I'm feeling good, I feel fit, but the whole thing was such a mystery to me.

So let's talk about your supplemental work in training. What else do you do to stay healthy? And did that change at all during the marathon cycle?

I didn't switch anything up during the marathon cycle, but I did get into having a strength training routine, I think in 2017, 2018. Before that, I never had touched a weight. So I think that actually helps a ton. And it's not to get like... I don't think I'm strength training to get faster. I'm strength training to work on my weaknesses and get a little more durable, and that will hopefully make you faster, because if you break down less, that's what will help. But I do that like twice a week, or like almost... I guess every day I work out. I'll do some gym work after.

Is that with weights or more body weight type stuff?

Most of it's body weight, but then I do... I squat and then I use kettlebells for like single leg RDLs. I thought it's a good one. I like that one a lot. Yeah, so most of it is, I guess, body weight work, but then I do a few heavier things, but not too much.

Let's talk about the race itself. You know, spoiler alert. You ran 223, second fastest debut ever by an American, behind only Jordan Hussay. And technically, if you're talking about record eligible courses, it will be the fastest debut. So it went well, but it didn't go to plan because the leaders had a different idea. So talk about how it played out for you.

Yeah, it didn't go according to plan, I guess exactly. We actually were hoping to run a bit faster, but I remember thinking before the race if the weather is not cooperating or the race doesn't go well, I feel like anything in that low 220 range I'd be happy with. And I remember we were taking the bus over to the race and Molly's like, it's really windy out. And I'm like, but it's like always windy in like England. So I don't like the race. Like everyone always runs fast here. And then she was right. It was really windy that race. So I think that must have been why the leaders didn't go with their pacer. But the lead group was meant to have a pacer, I think at like 217 pace or something. And that was obviously too fast for us. So Molly and I had like decided to be part of like a self paced group with like two other Japanese runners. And so we were going to go out like, I think we wanted to go out faster than we did by a bit. And but during the race, when the lead group didn't go with their pacer, then just totally let them go. And they slow down to slower than what we wanted to run. We're like, well, we're not going to like try to beat these women. So we hit the pace we want to run. Because I don't want to go out there on my own and then get reeled back in and then die or something. So yeah, we had to adjust. And it was good practice. We're just like, you're planning on not going how you wanted to go. And then the water stations were crazy because there was a ton of us. So I got to practice that, trying to take my bottle amongst a ton of women trying to take theirs. So no, it was good practice. And then I actually felt better. I feel like that second half when we were picking it up a little bit, like when it did open up. But it did feel harder that second half after a while because I think we were just all spread out. And I was totally on my own for the last 13 miles. So that's when I felt like I could notice the wind more. And even when I crossed the finish line, I ran into my husband right away. And my first thing I said to him, I was like, that was weird. I've never run a race before where you are solo for 13 miles. And he was excited. And he came up to me and I'm just like, I don't know how to process that. That was so strange. But yeah, no. So it didn't go exactly how we wanted it to go. But I was really happy with it in the end.

Yeah, and it's not just running 13 miles by yourself. It's running 13 miles on closed streets in London through one of the biggest cities in the world. And by all these crazy landmarks. So it's also just a cool venue to do that.

But finishing front of the Palace was pretty cool. I remember I saw the finish line. I don't even think I registered the Palace because I was like, the finish line is just there.

So when you're with that lead pack at the beginning, with basically the who's who of world major champions and Mary Catani and the whole bunch, is that intimidating at all? It seemed to me like if it were me, I would have freaked out completely.

No, I don't think I freaked out because I felt comfortable running the pace we were running, and it just was in my head. I'm like, well, they didn't want to go at their pace there. Eventually, they're going to pick it up, but I'm just thinking, okay, tuck in, try to be blocked from the wind. And yeah, I mean, I knew, because we were going at a pace I felt comfortable with, I wasn't intimidated, but I was more just like, I guess I was a little amazed that they were running back with us, but no, not too intimidated.

You seem pretty much calm and collected all the time. Anytime I've seen you interviewed, I mean, even after London, after running this amazing race, you're just pretty calm and matter of fact about it. Where does that come from?

Oh, thank you. My mom is really calm. I do hope, like, just when I was picked things like that, I'm sorry, I try to kind of emulate her sometimes with that, but I do have my moments. I asked my husband right before the race, I don't know, I had a little trip and a little scare before we got to the starting line, and I was not calm. I think that when I practice, like, I do practice, like, breathing techniques sometimes and, like, some mindfulness stuff, so I feel like that kind of helps center me, especially in moments where I'm overwhelmed by something. So thank you. But I try to be, but definitely not all the time. I definitely have things that can get me, trip me up sometimes.

So you ran a little faster on the second half, doing it solo. What was going through your mind?

I think, oh, this is one thing Molly told me before the race. Actually, this is what was going through my mind. She was like, just think about the next water bottle. Like, just like that's like the only thing you should be thinking about. And like when it seems like, like you have so far to go, she's like, just like break it down into like five Ks. And that was so much more manageable. So the last 13 miles, when I was on my own, I think I reeled in like two or three girls, maybe. So whenever I saw someone that was like incentive to kind of pick it up and like focus, like kind of focus on my form and things like that. But then I would also break it up into water bottles. So I was like, all right, I've got a water bottle in like two miles. Or like, I've got like my caffeine gel or whatever in like five Ks. That'll give me like a little boost. Like something like that. So I actually was probably just thinking about like staying composed, like trying to stay within myself because it was my first one. I didn't want to be pushing too hard. And then I just thought about the next water bottle.

Was there a point when it got harder for you or was it pretty smooth over that back?

I remember at 24 being like, okay, I'm ready to be done now, but I felt pretty good up until then. And even when I got like pretty tired at 24, I don't think I slowed down as much as I thought I was going to. I think I don't think I ever looked at the splits, but I remember at 24 getting pretty tired and like, okay, like two miles left, you can do it. But I was getting pretty tired then. But no, I felt pretty, I felt pretty good. So I think that's really positive. That's a positive takeaway.

So obviously it went well. Are you, do you think of yourself as a marathoner now?

Yeah, it took a few days to sink in. And then I was talking to my sister and she's like, you're a marathoner. I'm like, oh, you're right, I am. I would see them as a group of people that like, I don't know, I just never really would have considered myself having accomplished anything close to that in distance-wise. I've only done half marathons. So to me, it was just that whole thing mystery we talked about. And yeah, I was like, oh yeah, I'm a marathoner, I guess. I've done one. So I am getting back to the track and doing some shorter stuff, so I'm still going to run on the track.

Yeah, well, you're good at both, so you might as well keep doing both. But have you thought yet about what the next one would be? And will that be February of the Trials?

Yeah, that's the plan is Atlanta 2020. I'll do that. And then I want to hopefully come out of that Marathon a while, which will be hard because it's going to be a hilly spot. I'd like to come back and run the 10K at the Trials, too. And then, yeah, just to hopefully give myself two shots at making the team, I guess.

One thing that's crazy to me as I look back at your last nine months or so is your range. You win the US 5K champs in New York, and then you go run a half, finishing six seconds off an American record in Houston. Then you run the third fastest 10K ever by an American, hit Stanford, building up to London, and then you run the second fastest debut, a 223, seven fastest American female ever in the marathon. So from 5K to marathon, you've had a pretty damn impressive year. What do you attribute that range to?

I think it's a few things. I think, one, I've got a really good coach, and I really like his approach, and I thought his training for London was perfect. There are a few things I asked him if I could do differently the next time, but they were really small things, nothing major. Honestly, I never felt that tired during marathon training. I kept waiting for that to hit. I never felt like the workload was too much. I always felt pretty comfortable. So I think because I wasn't totally zapping the speed on my legs, I felt pretty good doing a 10K in the buildup. My mileage just wasn't as high as some other marathoners maybe. So I think having a really good coach helped. It helps a lot with that. I've been able to stay healthy for a really long extended period of time. I've got a really good chiropractor here in Phoenix, John Ball, who's helped me a ton, work on my weaknesses and kind of address things that needed to be addressing. And so he helped a lot. And also, honestly, I was telling my husband this today. I feel like having his support with all of my workouts the last nine months has really... I knew it would help, but I didn't know it was going to help this much. It's amazing how much I've improved since he started helping me out on workout days and long runs. Just having his support and having every workout pretty much be individualized to my needs, I guess. I think that's been a huge part of it.

So when is Shane going to run his marathon, then?

Yeah, it's funny because he did all the work.

All the work, not the payback?

He did a lot of it. He wouldn't do all the mileage or the long runs, but he did a ton of work. But he didn't actually get a race. And I remember afterwards, he was just as tired as I was. And I'm like, well, you went through the whole thing too. And yeah, it's worked out so well because he wanted to go back to school for another degree. So he's been able to do that online. And he took a step back from working to help me out, which has been just really helpful. I'm really thankful he did that. So yeah, it's worked out pretty well.

The support system is critical. Let's talk about your points there. I want to go back to talking about Ray, your coach, coached you in College of Providence, now coaches you and Molly. Obviously, one of the great distance coaches in the country. What have you learned from him?

I'm trying to think. I've learned so much, it's hard to put it in a nutshell. I feel like he's just always been really into the long, conservative approach to running. So even from my college days. He's always been the big picture type coach. And I think that gives me a lot of perspective, especially when I have something like flare up and I need to take a couple of days easy or something, or I get sick at the wrong time, I can get really annoyed, but then if I just take a step back and look at what are your big goals for this year, and kind of can refocus, and I can take some of the panic away of having to take a couple of days off or something. So he's always been really, I guess that big picture type coach and conservative and just trying to maximize your career and try to get longevity, I guess, out of it.

How did your dynamic work with him? You know, trust is obviously important. And so when you're, you know, like you said, there's a couple of things you would tweak about this cycle for next cycle. How do those conversations go? What's that dialogue like?

Yeah, no, it's a pretty good dialogue because I think he knows, I trust him and his approach. So I normally never really question anything, but then he's open for, I'll call him after most of my workouts because he's obviously in Providence and I'm here. And so I like give him feedback that way on things like how I felt and things like that. I mean, he's the one that makes all the calls and I normally don't ever think about switching anything up because what he's done has worked for me. So, but I remember after London, I was like, hey, like, what do you think of this? Like, what do you think I could do like slightly longer long runs for the next one? I think that's the one thing I brought up. Yeah, I think that was the one thing I asked him about. And he'd be like, well, either like, yeah, it's a good idea. Like you did so well with this training or like, no, like, let's keep it at this. This is the reason I do it. This, and he'll explain like why, like why my longer was kept at 23 miles and like the reasoning behind that to me. He's like, well, you were pretty fresh, like running a 10K off this training. So clearly you never were like, I don't know. He just explains why he does things to me. And I think having that dialogue is really important. And especially because we're not in the same part of the country right now. I'll be back in Providence next month, I think, or July. And that'll make it easier. But like having, I feel like the conversations like weekly with my workouts and stuff has been pretty key.

You talked about the long view and also being consistent in staying healthy. You had a little bit of an issue, I want to say last summer before USA is in the 10K, if I remember right.

Yeah, I was a bit banged up that summer. And I kind of tried racing USAs anyway, and it just was not fit. But yeah, I know that's when I kind of got the chiropractor I saw here. I just got his opinion on what do I need to work on to strengthen whatever is causing this issue. And so I've been trying to really work on my weaknesses pretty much since then. And that's, I think, been really helpful. There's always areas you can improve on. But kind of picking the things that are most pertinent to you, I guess, and not just looking at what other runners do and this strength room or something, because that might be different than what I need, I think that's been pretty helpful.

What else do you attribute to that long-term consistency in the sport?

I guess keeping it fun. That's pretty big because I feel like, I guess I can only speak for myself, but there are times throughout my career, I guess a lot, even when I was in college, there would be times I would feel really tired and just needing, after a long season, I found having a break of, even if it was only a week of running every other day, I found that pretty helpful in keeping that fire alive or running with teammates or running with friends, whatever it is that you need, keeping it enjoyable because I think that will keep you running for longer if you're enjoying what you're doing.

So let's go back to the aftermath of London. What did Molly say when she saw you after crossing the line?

I don't know exactly what we said to each other, but she was just really, I guess, really kind. She was like, that was a really good run. I hope you ran really well. I hope that can sink in. I feel like she didn't have the day, obviously, she would have liked. And I know she was in better shape and fitness-wise. She was better than that performance. But she was still a really gracious, it's just who she is as a person. She was just a very good job. That's always how she's been. She's always really genuine when she sees someone else run really well. She's like, wow, that was a good performance. I'm happy for that person. There's nothing fake about it. She's very genuine and I like that. She doesn't see someone else run well and then is like, oh, well, what is that? I'm trying to word this right. I feel like I'm fumbling here. No, that's the word. She's not jealous. If she sees someone else run well, she won't be jealous or envious. She might be more motivated or something, but never that way. She's a very genuine competitor, and I really like that about her as well.

Yeah, she's still figuring out the marathon, I guess, in a sense. It's too bad that she didn't have it come together there in London, but she's still got a PR, which is awesome, and an Olympic standard.

It is hard with the marathon. There are so many variables, trying to get them all right on one day. Honestly, that was my biggest, not concern, but the thing I thought I would dislike the most about the marathon going into it, and even after the marathon, it's still the thing I dislike the most, how you forego all these other races and just pass up on them. And you train so hard for three months, and then anything could happen. You could get sick or eat a funny piece of chicken or something, I don't know, like the night before, and anything can happen. And you can't just go run another marathon in a week or two. So that's probably my least favorite part about the marathon.

Yeah, or it can be 35 degrees and 25 mile an hour winds and raining, like it was for her last year in Boston, unfortunately.

You know, it was like weather no one's ever seen before. And this is like a once-in-a-lifetime type thing. We're probably never going to see this again. Like, people like last year didn't even know how to dress for that, Molly was saying. Like, they thought they were overdressing, and everyone ended up underdressing. It was just something...

They don't make clothes for those conditions.

It's always something unexpected with the marathon, I feel like. Something that, I don't know, I feel like that was kind of my, like, biggest lesson throughout that whole build-up and race. I'm like, there's always something. You didn't think about that. Like, just comes out of nowhere. So, but yeah, I feel like practicing that, being flexible with, like, whatever is thrown your way, like, and just doing the best you can, like, it's probably the biggest, like, takeaway.

And then after London, I think you went to Spain, if I am correct, on stalking your Instagram. How was that?

It was so nice, yeah. My, so my husband and I were talking about doing a trip, and then he, so he went home to Ireland, actually, before the marathon, and then met me in London. And so then afterwards, like, we were gone for so long, we were just going to go back, and then I was like, well, I'm actually going to reach out to my mom and see if she wants to take a vacation. And she's always wanted to go to Spain, so I'm glad we got to do that. I actually thought that was, because I've never done anything like that with my mom before, just like taking like a trip with her, and I really enjoyed it. I like wish I had put a little more planning into it, but the marathon was obviously my biggest, like the reason we were going over there. So once we got to Spain, I was like, well, what should we do? And we actually had a great time just like walking around and like the food was amazing. Like the food and the wine were the best part, I feel like. So just kind of like getting to experience Spain. And yeah, it was fun just doing that with my mom.

Where did you go in Spain?

We went to Seville and Barcelona. Pretty different cities, so we kind of got to experience two different parts of Spain. Yeah.

Yeah, Barcelona is much more modern.

Yeah.

Seville is more traditional.

Yeah, exactly. So Seville, we love that we got the traditional taste of Spain, I guess. And it was so funny because we didn't realize, I know, I've heard of a siesta before. Right. Like everyone's like that. And during the afternoon, everything's closed. And you're like, well, what's everyone doing? I guess, do we just go back and nap? And then I found these beautiful gardens in Seville. And I was like, oh, we should definitely go there. They actually, I don't know if you watched Game of Thrones, but they shot part of Game of Thrones there. And so I talked my mom into it. I was like, we should go to these gardens. They're so pretty. And then we show up. And there's like the biggest line I've ever seen of like Game of Thrones fans, like four hour long wait. I was amazed. It was not even like their tourist season. Like it was like, we saw like almost no other tourists when we were there. Yeah, there was this like four hour line at like, I think it was called Alcazar or something. I don't know, if you're Game of Thrones fans, it's where like the city of Dorne is. But it was so funny to me. I was like, yeah, that. So if I planned ahead, I would have bought tickets or something.

Yeah, I was in Croatia last fall, and well, I guess it was late summer, early fall. And it was that everywhere. It's like Game of Thrones tour.

Oh, I'm sure after like King's Landing is.

We didn't actually go there, but we just saw the tourism hub above about it everywhere. There was all of that evidence. So did you watch the finale? Are you caught up?

No, yeah, we're caught up. My husband and I watched it. It definitely wasn't what we expected. But did you watch it? Are you a Game of Thrones?

Yeah, we watched it. And yeah, so without spoiling for anybody who hasn't, what was your take? Did you like it? Not like it?

I didn't love it. And we're not that... We're pretty easy to please people. We don't need a crazy storyline. When everyone else is complaining about season eight, we're like, well, we're still enjoying it. But it did make the finale kind of disappointing. Just because I think they were trying to do something totally unpredictable, but then it just didn't make sense. Or maybe it did make sense, but they just didn't do a great job playing it out on the show. But I didn't like how the key female roles also kind of, I don't know how they ______ those. But yeah, so I guess we were a little disappointed, but it was still such a fun series to watch.

Yeah, I'm with you. I was disappointed too. And it was weird to me the time they spent on something like Tyrion climbing down into the crypts to see his dead brother and sister. That whole scene with him getting the torch and walking, I mean, that took forever. And then in less time than that, they decided who was going to be king and how that was going to be decided. So that just is kind of a weird pacing. And yeah, as you said, weird storytelling that didn't quite make sense, given the plot history.

I don't know. But yeah, also the key female lead role kind of didn't. I think everyone expected it to be like a queen or something, or at least like, I don't know if it was a king and it wasn't really.

Yeah, there were some wasted characters, I feel like, in the end. So I agree with you. Speaking of TV, I think I saw somewhere that Netflix is your guilty pleasure.

Yeah, Netflix and reading. I feel like that's what I do when I'm marathon training, and I have to rest during the day when I'm running. If I was doing a 12 and 4 or 5 double or something, I need to rest in between those. I can't really do too much. So yeah, Netflix and reading were my two guilty, but not really that guilty pleasure. I'm like, I need to rest anyway.

Really, it's work, right? You're working on recovery. So give me some Netflix favorites from recent history.

We watched so many.

Okay.

Recent history, Big Little Lies. That's on Netflix, actually. That's really good. There was a show. What did we just watch last week? I forget what it was called. It was similar to Big Little Lies, though. It's on Netflix. It's really big right now. I can't remember it. Oh, Dead to Me. Dead to Me. That's what it was. It was really good. Dead to Me.

Oh, Dead to Me is the one with Christine Applegate?

Yeah, it's with her. Yeah, that one's good.

My wife is watching that one. I'm not up to speed yet.

That one's pretty good. We have Hulu. We have HBO Go. We've got Netflix, Amazon Prime.

All the streaming things.

I know. We have everything.

Okay, so that shows. Then what about books?

Books. Okay, so I kind of go back and forth between... What have I read recently? I just started Michelle Obama's book. That was really good. That's been good so far. I go from serious ones to the big little lies genre of books, which would just be the dramas. They're always the predictable plots. Someone dies, there's a murder, there's some drama in some small town. So I go back and forth between those kind of books. I'm trying to think at the top of my head what would be a good recommendation. I'll have to think about it. I go through so many of them, I actually forget.

If you like nonfiction, I would suggest the book Range, which I talked about at the beginning. That's coming out next week. David Epstein, he also wrote The Sports Team. I don't know if you've ever read that. Really, really good book.

Yeah, I actually started that one.

So let's go back to running really quick. So your next marathon will be Atlanta 2020 at the Trials on February 29th, leap day. That's a very different course than London.

Yeah, no, it's very different. To be honest, I haven't really thought that. I'm not a person that usually thinks that far ahead. I'm always focused on the race I'm running or the one I'm preparing for. But at the same time, I have thought a bit about it. And it is hilly, so I do want to practice running on hills because in Phoenix, it's very flat. And I don't know, I feel like I'm not scared of the hills. I think it's just going to make it a totally different race. Because I am a strong runner, I feel like, for the most part. I feel like my strength is my strength. So I just need to kind of work on running hills and practicing and preparing for those. But New York Half has always been really hilly and I've always found those courses to be pretty fun. Yeah, no, it'll be interesting. Because from what I'm hearing from everyone, it just sounds really tough. And I kind of want to see it in person. So I'll probably take a trip there at some point just to check it out. But I think just like preparing for it by maybe practicing running some hills and like going to flagstaff and going places I can do like hilly long runs will help. And then, yeah, I think just like not psyching myself out because everyone has to do it. Yeah, I find it interesting because usually they try to pick like a course that like mimics or similar to the Olympic course. And I think the Tokyo one's actually like pretty flat. It might be a turny, but it doesn't look hilly at all from what I saw. So I did find that interesting. They chose to run it there. Like I feel like they usually pick somewhere like that. Weather-wise is pretty similar and like course-wise is similar. But I guess, yeah, not this time, I guess. Maybe the weather.

Weather could be similar because I know it's going to be hot in Tokyo and Atlanta. Atlanta could be hot as well. Yeah, but it'll be, but you're I mean, now having just run this 223, I mean, you're already probably a favorite to potentially win, certainly to make the team. How are you thinking about embracing that role as a potential favorite here?

I haven't really thought about that because it's still, my mind is pretty far off. I feel like I have so much work to do before then. So I honestly, I feel like you can't really pick favorites this far out anyway, because so much can happen. People can have breakthroughs, people could go through a rough patch or something. So I feel like you still can't pick favorites this far out. So I'm just focusing on trying to stay healthy and just keep, hopefully have a good solid track. I'd like to get back on the track, so I'd like to have a few good track races.

And then just preparing more for 2020. I assume you'll aspire to make the World Team this year. Will that be in the plans for the summer?

That's the goal. So I'm hoping I come off this marathon feeling pretty good. I've only two workouts back, so I haven't been back running that long. So I'm hoping it keeps going well. And yeah, because I'd love to make that team. That's like my next goal. So yeah, we'll just see how training and everything goes.

The Olympics. That's obviously the goal for next year. You'll try in the marathon. You'll try in the 10K. What does the Olympics mean to you, and what would it be like you think making that team?

I mean, I'd love to make the Olympic team. In 2016, I remember really hoping to make that team, and I was injured that year and just not fit. And being pretty sad, I remember, after for two days. And then I was fine, because I always give myself like, oh, you can feel down about a race for a day or 24 hours, but then you got to pick up and move on. But then, I don't know, I feel like back then I was so much younger. I just felt this need to like, almost like to prove to myself like, oh, like you have to make this team like, or else like, I don't know, like it's going to be terrible if you don't make it or something. I don't know, I'm four years younger, so, or three years younger, I guess. But now I'm like, I really want to make that team, because I really like want to prepare. But I'm like that with every team. I really want to make Doha. I just set goals for myself, and now I just want to like do my best to try to achieve them. But I don't have this fear, I suppose, that I had back then of failing and not making it. Now I'm just really motivated, and I'm like, well, I want to see what I can get out of myself. But I feel like I'm more positive, like emotions motivating me right now.

So you've got the Mini 10K coming up on June 8th, if I'm getting my dates right. What else is coming up before the US Champs?

I'm thinking about doing Peachtree. So that one, so I can go to Atlanta actually, forgot about that when we were talking about it. So yeah, possibly Peachtree. And I think that would be it. And then just the US Champs. And yeah, I'll get back to Providence to hopefully train in July to get ready for that. So everything's like in the air right now, but this is like my tentative racing schedule.

Awesome. Well, we will be cheering for you along the way and hoping you make both of those teams, Doha as well as Tokyo. So thank you, Emily. Congrats again on your marathon debut. This has been a lot of fun chatting with you.

Yeah, thanks so much for having me.

There you go. Emily Sisson, everyone. Hopefully you enjoyed that conversation and got to know her a little bit as she is definitely someone to watch over the next year building to Tokyo. I think she's someone who could make not only the marathon team but the 10K team as well and potentially compete in two events at Tokyo, depending on how that schedule plays out. So thank you, Emily. Thank you also to you, the audience, for listening. As always, you can check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Instagram, Twitter or Facebook, at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.