Hey, everybody, welcome to episode 379 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung, back after a summer hiatus. Thank you for your patience with that. Hopefully, you have people who still want to listen to me talk on this podcast. It's not going anywhere, but one thing I've learned, especially as my kids are aging, is that summer is tricky for me in terms of producing that content because I'm heavily invested in being there for my kids as long as they're still in the house, and summer is a formative time to spend with them. So that has fueled my break spending time with my kids over the summer. All things Rogue Running are still in full effect. I was just taking a break from the podcast, and I appreciate your patience with that. I'm going to better program those breaks in the future so that you can expect when I will fall away and when I will come back for next summer. Because I think a summer hiatus is in the works for me as long as my kids are in the house. But excited to be back with you. Thanks for your patience. Hopefully I still have people who want to listen to me drone on. I'm excited to be back to be talking about coaching. We have some fun and cool things coming in the Rogue world that I'll be talking about in future episodes. But for now, we're going to give a little bit of a catch up on me, and then I'm going to share actually a poem that I wrote and some of the deeper meanings behind it that I was inspired to write in the spring and was able to put down on paper sometime this summer. So we'll be covering that poem and its deeper meanings through this episode. But first a quick update on all things Rogue Running. We are again in full effect as we've always been with our in-person programming in Dallas and Austin and we'll be kicking off our training for winter races actually this coming weekend, tomorrow, Labor Day weekend. For those that are in and around the Austin or Dallas areas, you have the opportunity to train with us for anything in the winter starting now. Houston, Austin, Austin International Half for those that might be in the Texas area, but that would also include Mesa Marathon, Cowtown Marathon in Fort Worth, Tokyo, which is early March as well. So anybody who might be in those areas and wanted to start training with us in the next few weeks now is the time to join. You can also join any of our virtual groups as well. Those are all now open year round, so you can jump into any of those, including the one I coach, the Renegades, if that's of interest. And if you're training for a race between January and March, come join us for that journey. We'll help you get ready for whatever your goals may be. So that's all in full effect. And as usual, you can jump into any of that now, whether it be in person or virtual with us. You can check out that information at roguerunning.com or always, you can always email us coaching at roguerunning.com if you have questions about how to join in in training with us. So, that's what I have by way of intro. I'm excited to be back with you recording the podcast. As I said, took a little break mainly to focus on my kids. I've got about six more years till all of them are out of the house. And those summers are a precious time to bond with them while they have their school break. So I was doing all of that this summer, and but I'm back. I'm back to hopefully weekly weekly episodes to help you get educated on all sorts of training topics. I'm approaching that 400th episode, which is exciting, but I'm back. And thank you for your patience. And if you want to see more from me, we'd love an email on just feedback or ideas or whatever you want to throw my way, chris at roguerunning.com. I always love hearing from our listeners. Sometimes in this cave I record in, I kind of wonder if anyone's even out there listening, but I know you are. So if you want to send an email and give me any feedback or ideas on topics, send that over at chris at roguerunning.com. Also every Friday, James Dawes and I, one of our fellow coaches here at Rogue have been on the at Rogue Running Instagram account at two o'clock Central. We get on there to do a live recording and really to answer any live Q and A's that might come through the comments. So if you want to interact with me on a weekly basis, you can jump on that Instagram live at 2 p.m. Central every Friday with James and I. Just get on there, jump in, throw in your question and we'll answer it. Or if you just want to see what other people are asking, we usually go for about 30 minutes and have really good questions on Fridays. So come check that out as well. And as I said, there's more coming. I'll tease that very gently that we're excited about here in this fall. But this episode, I wanted to share a poem that I wrote. And I haven't written a lot of poems in my life. I do not consider myself a poet. But I did have the inspiration to write one that hit me about springtime. And then I was able to, in June, actually sit down and take the time to put it down on paper. I hadn't written a poem formally until I was required to do so in, or since I was required to do so in high school. But I do venture to say that maybe I have some occasional creative bones in my body, and those can come out. And so this one just came out. And it's the closest experience I've had to what songwriters describe is where you get this inspiration with maybe a lyric and or a melody, and then suddenly that comes to you, and then you quickly turn that into a song. And this is the same for me, but with a poem. And a poem is about life, but it's also about running. And so just to give you a little bit of background and context, I was listening listening to a podcast that was actually shared with me by James Dodds. He shared this podcast with a poet named David Whyte, who was talking with this podcaster who works in counseling. And it was a really fascinating conversation that gets really deep really quickly. I'll share that podcast with you in the show notes if you want to check it out. Be warned though, the first five minutes get really deep really fast. It does get lighter as the podcast progresses and not quite as deep, but it gets deep quickly in a good way, not in a bad way, it just kind of makes you think really quickly. And so if you're willing and you want to jump in, go check it out. But I was listening to this podcast with a poet named David Whyte. He was talking about largely about one of his books. He's got books called Consolations. There's two versions, Consolations 1 and Consolations 2, where he has little mini essays describing different human emotions and feelings and words in a way that's quite poetic, but they're more like short essays than they are poems in those books. And he was giving some of the examples in this podcast, but he and the podcast host started pretty quickly talking about many things, and again, many deep things. But one of the things that comes up is this idea of being willing to sit with deep feelings or emotions or experiences. There's a human tendency to want to move quickly past something that's hard or painful. But he describes the need to sit with that thing and let it slowly move through you until it becomes more fluid, and until you're able to fully process it through you without it being what might seem initially as this immovable wall of emotion that you just kind of want to either run away from or run around. So he was talking about that, and I'm paraphrasing, but he was talking about that and the need to sit with those moments and just let them sit and slowly turn more soft and fluid and then gradually move through you instead of running away or running around. And it's those hard emotions and those hard moments that might require a little more time to sit with them for it to loosen up or soften up or for you to be able to process it. But as humans, we often run quickly away from them instead of just being, instead of just letting it marinate until it eventually moves through you and you might through that process just develop more insight to what you were feeling there and then be able to manage it and process it better versus the other strategies of running away or running around. So anyway, in all of that, it brought up this thought in me that kept coming back as a potential poem that again is about running and is about life, but this idea of why are we running so fast and if you've listened to my podcast in any length or gone back to these episodes, you know that one of the fundamental training principles for me as a coach is you have to slow down so that you can do more mileage, be more consistent, recover from the hard work so that you can get faster, gotta go slow to get fast. And I think that applies in running, but it also applies in life. And so I had this inspiration of this one line of a poem, Why are you running so fast? And it quickly in my mind as I was listening to this podcast, connected to my 20 years of coaching and this idea that I constantly run up against in communicating that fundamental training tenet, that you have to go slow to go fast. I run up against or see a lot of resistance from athletes. And I understand it again, it's a bit of a counterintuitive principle that you have to go slow to go fast. And I talk all about that in episode 306. If you want to talk, if you want to go back into all of the training reasons and the scientific reasons why I preach running slow to get faster. But I, but I always get resistance when talking about that. And it starts with an intellectual resistance of, well, it seems counterintuitive that that would be true, that you have to go slow to get fast. I thought you had to run fast to get fast. And so there's always a surface level intuitive or intellectual resistance. But then once people get past that, once they can intellectually understand the reasons why you have to go slow to get faster, once they understand it at the surface level, intellectual level, then there's often still resistance. And that resistance comes from a lot of different places that I think are often subconscious or deeper than that intellectual level that starts to get to our fears, our doubts, our challenges with expectations of others. And those are the hard ones to move through and move past in order to give ourselves permission to go slow enough to be able to truly reach our potential in this sport. And I think that can also be true in life, is that we're often running too fast for whatever reason, and it's causing us maybe to miss the deeper moments, the bigger inspirations, the potential that we could find in any space in our life. And so, this poem, as I was listening to that podcast, kind of came into my mind's eye as one line, why are you running so fast? And then a connection to all of those thoughts about the subconscious reasons why people struggle accepting that truth in their running. And then, of course, that can translate to the life of others as well. So that idea came into my mind, and it wasn't a poem, a fully formed poem at the time, but it was just an idea. And for whatever reason, I had the line, why are you running so fast? And I knew it needed to be a poem, but I didn't know whether or not that would ever manifest. And so then I let it marinate in my head for a couple of months. And then finally, in June, I had some time while I was traveling with my son, he was doing a camp in New York and I was there chaperoning. And I had some time and space, quiet time and space in the hotel room when he was at his camp. And I sat down and I just started to put the thoughts on paper starting with that line, why are you running so fast? And I had started to connect the other ideas into it. And then suddenly 40, 45 minutes later, I had a fully formed poem that I would then refine a little bit with a few words here and there the next morning after I looked at it again. And then I felt pretty good about it. And again, I'm not a poet, although I've had a friend tell me that if you write poems, then you're a poet, which I can appreciate because I tell people if they're a runner or if they're running, then they're a runner. So I can appreciate it from that perspective. So I'm not sure if this is good and I don't care. That's not the point. The point is, this poem represents about 20 years of insight distilled into one page of stanzas in a poem that I think can get pretty deep if you're willing to lean into it. So I wanted to share it with you today, and then also talk a little bit about some of the meanings that I think are embedded in this poem. And it reinforces, yes, the truth about running training, which is that you have to run slow to get fast. But I think it also helps us look into those deeper subconscious reasons why we're resisting that truth that might be holding us back. So with that as a pretty long preamble about how we got here, I'm gonna share with you my poem that I've titled, Why So Fast. Here we go. Why are you running so fast? The burning question that will last, that will keep you from your chance to endure beyond endurance. Are you running from your fears or the moments that bring tears? What if you slow down instead and let them linger in your head? To learn and grow and heal, may they catch you in your feels. And while it may be just a start, feel deeply and with your whole heart. Are you running from your doubts or the expectations of the crowd? There's only sadness on that trail, like chasing your own tail. There's no need to press or hustle, stop spinning in a futile circle, and let this truth sink in. Your worth is where you stand. Are you running from your grave or perhaps you have years to save? There's no point in living for more time when it leaves you in the grind. Movement unlocks new life, but you need not move in strife. Take your time and bring a friend and don't worry about the very end. Are you running toward a dream or the trophy that might gleam? There is great irony in this chase because you must not chase in haste. If getting there faster is your goal, then you must run mostly slow, so put on a patient smile and go run miles and miles. Yes, there are times to hurry, but those should never be in worry. Pick wisely when you speed and only when you need. As Frost says, there are miles to go, so do make sure you know the answer to this ancient test. Why, oh, why are you running so fast and why not slow down instead? So there you go. My poem, Why So Fast. I'm going to let that sink in and breathe a little bit. Hopefully, something in there sparked something in you that might get into the deeper insights about the resistance to that truth. Because I can tell you, speaking for myself, is that I intellectually believe the principle here, which is you got to go slow to get your potential or to go fast. And even as a coach who preaches it, lives it, knows it at my core, there are still elements in this poem that even myself struggles with at times that might take me off the path of taking my time and moving slowly through space in order to not only reach my full potential, but to enjoy the journey as much as I possibly can. And so even I struggle with some of these things. And so I know you do. And I've seen it countless times in the athletes that I coach. There's always this subconscious resistance to this immutable truth that you have to slow down to get the most out of life and to get the most out of your running goals. And so let's dig into each of these stanzas that kind of touches on the areas where I think people struggle. We'll start with the second stanza where I say, are you running from your fears or the moments that bring tears? One of the things that I see as a common source of resistance in people is fear. Fear of failure, fear of sometimes success. I've talked about that on the podcast before. But we're afraid. We're afraid of what happens if I don't get it. And we'll talk later about indirectly about other fears, about fears of what if you let someone down. But with this one, it's a lot about that fear of failure, which causes us to overcompensate. And we think, man, if I fail, I'm afraid to fail. So then therefore, you overdo everything in order to try to not fail. And so there's this overcompensation that happens when we're running from that fear of failure that causes us to not go slow and take our time, but rather to rush it. We think, if this pace is what was prescribed by my coach, then if I go a little bit faster than that pace, then that'll be better. Then that'll get me there faster. Or if I go faster on my easy runs or my long runs, closer to my race pace, then that'll be an opportunity to prove to myself that I can do it. Then I'll be more ready to actually do it on race day. And so we take that fear of failure and we overcompensate and we overdo and we go too fast, we do too much, we rush ourselves, and that ultimately only delays reaching your potential. You might see some short term success with that approach, but only long term delays the process. And most of the time ends up in a place where you're overcompensating, you end up burned out, injured, struggling, instead of moving smoothly towards that goal. So that's one of the thoughts embedded in this stanza. The other one, or the moments that bring tears, sometimes we're running from that feeling of failure. Maybe we have the bad race or we have a situation where we get let down and then we're rushing to get to the next thing because we don't want to sit with it. We want to go around it or we want to run away from it, like I was referring to in my inspiration from David Whyte. And so therefore we rush quickly to the next thing to try to cover up that feeling that we didn't like, that we didn't get what we wanted. And so instead of doing what the poem says and letting those things catch you in your feels and feeling deeply with your whole heart, so that that hard feeling, that feeling of failure, that disappointment, that regret, whatever it may be, instead of running from it or moving around it, we sit with it. We let it break up. We let it become fluid. We let it move through us in a way that allows us to really internalize it, that allows us to mourn and grieve whatever we may have missed, so that we can truly move on physically and mentally to the next thing. You got to take your time. You got to sit in those moments instead of quickly moving through them. Otherwise, you're going to have undealt with struggles and feelings that will eventually come back and catch you in some way, shape or form. So sit with those things. If you have a bad race or you have a tough moment in life, just sit with it. Let it break up. Let it soften. Let it move through you so that you can fully process it, learn from it, and then move on to the next. So those are some examples from that stanza. And then the next one, I talk about, are you running from your doubts or the expectations of the crowd? I find this comes up a lot. When people are insecure about what they can do or uncertain about what they can do or they're worried about what other people might think of what they can do, then we often rush things. Again, it's a way to overcompensate for those doubts, a way to overcompensate for those expectations of others. And instead of being confident in our decisions, being confident in the fact that if you go slow, you'll eventually get there and beyond perhaps your wildest expectations. Instead of sticking with that, we overcompensate and we chase. We go too fast because we're insecure. We go too fast because we think others are watching and we want to prove to them, prove to them that we can do it. And this can manifest in doing stuff on Strava, that might be because there are eyeballs there, people looking at what you're doing and you want your pace, your average pace to manifest in a certain way in those spaces, so that people believe that you're good enough. Or maybe this manifests in that FOMO, that fear of missing out that causes you to race too much and not put the right emphasis on the big goals, the two or three big goals that you can truly peak for in a given year. So then you're out there racing all the time or putting too much pressure on some B or C races in a way that compromises the A race that really matters for you. We're always, always, always worried about what other people might think about us. And it causes us to do things that are unproductive. As the poem says, there's only sadness on that trail. You've got to let go of the expectations of others. You've got to let go of the doubts and insecurities that you might have about yourself. And that doesn't mean they go away permanently because they might still pop up. There will be a devil on your shoulder that is whispering in your ear the temptation to do it the wrong way. That's not going to go away, but you will get better at dealing with those things. Recognize them for what they are, setting them aside and say, no, I'm going to focus on the next right step versus taking shortcuts or rushing in a way that might give me some near-term satisfaction or quiet to that devil on your shoulder in the near term, but it isn't going to get you what you want in the long term. So stop spinning in a futile circle. Let this truth sink in. Your worth is where you stand. You're already good enough. Nothing you do in this sport is needed for validation about your own strength and worth and power. It's all gravy, and you've got to own that and let that truth sink in. This isn't about proving to yourself that you're anything, but rather letting running be a celebration of your power and strength. That to me is the nirvana in running motivation. Letting it be a celebration of your power and strength versus proving that you're worthy. You don't need that. Your worth is already where you stand. Getting to the next stanza, a thing I see a lot now, especially with all of this talk about longevity. Are you running from your grave or perhaps you have years to save? People are trying to live longer. Nothing wrong with that goal. But as a result, they're doing crazy things that they see on Instagram, taking shortcuts in life, thinking they got to go faster somehow to live longer. And I'm here to tell you, it's the opposite. Longevity, the key to longevity actually is slow, easy, frequent, consistent movement. Ideally with the friend as the poem references. You don't need to take shortcuts to live longer. You don't need to buy into all of the Instagram social media hacks. What you need to do is lean into the fundamentals of the things I preach, which is easy, consistent, frequent movement is the key to unlocking new life and ideally doing it with the community surrounding you to give you that love. Sometimes we also think we're running out of time. Life's too short. I got to rush to do all the things I want to do. I see people in their 20s and 30s trying to check things off so quickly because they think somehow they're going to run out of time. You know, they've got to do all six majors or now seven majors in two or three years because those things are going somewhere or I've got to qualify for Boston right now. If, if that's the way you're living and you're going to take shortcuts to get there that aren't beneficial for the long term development of you as a human or as a runner, it's not worth it. It's not worth it. Take your time. The majors aren't going anywhere. Boston isn't going anywhere. Your goals aren't going anywhere. If you do, if you lean into the fundamentals of the work, if you enjoy the process and the journey, if you don't rush it, if you don't skip steps, then I promise you there will be more fulfillment and you're going to reach higher potential if you're willing to give yourself the time and space to do it right. None of those things are urgent. They're not going anywhere. And yes, none of us are promised tomorrow. None of us are promised tomorrow. But when you're on your deathbed or when heaven forbid life takes you from this planet too soon, will it matter that you've done all the majors? No, what will matter is how you spent your time and who you spent it with, and whether or not you truly gave yourself space to enjoy it and soak it all in versus rushing from one thing to the next. That's my belief, but I understand the challenge and the temptation to go a different way. So yes, life might be short, but I promise you to get the most out of it. Take your time and bring a friend, and don't worry about the very end. The next thing and one of the more common things I see gets to the next stanza, are you running toward a dream or the trophy that might gleam? People think in order to get a goal, get a PR, get a time or to beat people and get a certain trophy, they think they have to go fast to do so. And I'm just here to tell you, it's not how it works. This gets to the very fundamentals of what I'm talking about from a training perspective. If getting there faster is your goal, then you must run mostly slow. So put on a patient smile and go run miles and miles. The more miles you can run, the faster you'll be. And the only way to stack the mileage that you need to stack to reach your full potential and to beat people and go chase trophies is to slow down. Because the body can only recover from the quantity of volume and miles you need if you do those miles easy enough. And yes, occasionally once a week maybe do a workout. But outside of that, easy patient miles and you really can't go too slow. You can stack miles, you will get the results. But again, the only way to do that is to slow way, way down. And to stop looking at those easy runs and comparing them to other easy runs and thinking because you ran 10 seconds per mile faster on this long run than last week's long run that that's somehow better. No, don't think about that way at all. In fact, ask yourself, could I run 30 seconds per mile slower? Could I? Could I practice that? Because if you can do that, I promise you it's going to unlock things that you just never expected. You're going to be able to put more into your workouts. You're going to be able to do more miles. You're going to feel better. You're going to be more recovered when you're doing the big workouts and long runs. You're going to be able to put more into those. But it takes really truly letting go of this idea that I have to run within a certain range. No, slow way down. Teach yourself to slow down to a point where you're running 2, 3, 4 minutes slower than marathon pace or 2.5, 3.5, 4.5 minutes slower than half marathon pace. Teach yourself to go to that space and then just see how amazing you feel and how many more miles you can do. I have people tell me all the time, well, I can't run 5 days a week because I get hurt or I can't run that many miles because I get hurt. Well, why do you get hurt? I promise you it's because you're running too fast in those miles or running too fast on those days. Slow way down and just see what it unlocks in terms of how many miles you can do. Just see what it unlocks. And when you can unlock that, the ability to do a lot more than you're doing now, you're going to smash it. You're going to start doing things you never thought possible, and it's going to be mind-blowing, but it takes a willingness to actually do it. And most people don't have that willingness. And as the poem says, yes, there are times to hurry, but those should never be in worry. Sure, there's times to run fast. Speed workouts, the occasional long-run workout, obviously on race day. But those should be carefully planned. They should not be in worry. They should not be anxious. They should not be done in a way where you think you need to run a certain pace in order to prove something to yourself. No, they should be done in a prescribed way that fits together in the overall puzzle that is generally and mostly in control so that you can then recover from that work and assimilate it into getting faster, truly with all the other easy mileage. It's measured. The speed is always measured. And only when you need it based on a well-measured, well-coordinated plan. But it's hard for people to accept that speed has its time and place that should be carefully woven into your training. Instead, they let it just creep in all the time for whatever reason. It's like, well, I just I ran fast today because it felt good. Or I ran fast today because I want to keep up with so-and-so. And what are those? Those are just examples of insecurity, ego creeping in. Well, I need to prove to myself I'm as fast as that person, so I'm going to keep up with them on this long run today, instead of keeping the big picture in mind and recognizing that, hey, no, I actually need to slow down today in order to get the full benefits of the work in order to be able to recover from this work and then do the thing that really matters next. Don't get suckered in to using speed because of anxiety, because you're chasing something, because of the fears and doubts that we talked about earlier in the poem. And then as I close, talk about frost. There are miles to go. That's a reference to a Robert Frost poem. Go look it up because it's one of my favorites. And it leaves you with this question. Why or why are you running so fast? And why not slow down instead? To me, that is the ultimate question. And that all of us need to ask ourselves that question, not just with our running, but with our life. And then contemplate, what would happen if? What if I slow down instead? What would happen if I accepted the challenge of this poem and I truly slow down and said, there will be magic to unlock from a running potential standpoint, and I think there will be enjoyment and fulfillment to unlock from a life standpoint. And that's 20 years of coaching wisdom, 56 years of life wisdom coming out in this poem. And I hope there will be something in there that resonates with you. So there you go. Why so fast? Hopefully that'll leave you with some thoughts to carry into the weekend. I'm excited to be back. I'll wrap this episode here. And I'll remind you that as always, you can check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Instagram or Facebook at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.