Hey, everybody, welcome to episode 158 of the Running Rogue Podcast. This is Chris coming to you from Austin, Texas. And I am following up on episode 156, where I talked about the Mary Cain story, this time as promised to discuss this topic with a female coach. And I have to thank listener Mimi Albert for connecting me to my interview guest today. I've got Dena Evans coming on the show, and Dena is someone who's coached for the last 20 years at the highest levels in track and field. She started as a coach, assistant coach under Vin Lananna at Stanford University, where she spent six years, first as Vin's assistant for cross country and track and field, and then became the head coach of the women's cross country team, where she led the Stanford Cardinal to the 2003 NCAA cross country title. While she was there, she coached Sarah Hall as well as Lauren Fleshman, as well as others to a whole host of individual and team accolades while at Stanford. From there, she moved on and has in the last 14 years served various roles with Team USA, helping lead Team USA at high level meets around the world, including the World Cross Country Championships, the IAAF World Relay Championships, as well as the IAAF World Track & Field Championships both indoor and outdoor, including being at Doha this year to help with the team from a coaching standpoint. So she's coached to the highest level of Team USA and has spent the last 12 years as club director and coach for the Peninsula Distance Club, formerly the Strava Track Club there in the Bay Area, where she's coaching post-collegiate and elite development type athletes to pursue their goals beyond college. And so she's coached at all levels and has coached, obviously, a lot of men and women through the years in the last 20 years of coaching. And I think brings a really powerful perspective to this conversation. So I'm excited to have her on to help educate me as well as others about how we talk about, address, treat, manage this topic of running body weight and nutrition. I think if you're an athlete, I think this will be a helpful discussion because it will help potentially frame how you might think about it as an individual athlete. I think if you're a coach, it will certainly help frame how you think about this topic from a coaching standpoint and how you have these conversations. I do want to say though and just place the caveat for Dena and I that neither of us have all the answers and we are trying to figure this out and hoping through dialogue and conversation to continue to get better on this topic so that we can all elevate our words, our thoughts, our approaches in terms of how we address these topics with our athletes. Again, we don't have all the answers but we're hoping that talking about it gets us to a better place. With that as an intro, I'm going to jump right into my conversation with Dena. Welcome Dena Evans to the show. How are you doing today, Dena?

Doing great, Chris.

Thank you for coming on. I wanted to start by getting your background first. What's your background as an athlete and then how did you become a coach from there?

Okay, well, yeah, my background as an athlete is not necessarily just in running. I grew up near Seattle and did a bunch of sports growing up and I think up until the point probably until somewhere, I don't even know, maybe even into my 30s, I probably considered myself an athlete who happened to participate in running. I think at one point, I probably liked basketball the best, but in college, I did soccer and track. High school, I did all three. So I grew up doing a bunch of different things and one thing that we may not have talked about is that when I was in middle school, I was a part of an alternative PE program where we did a lot of crazy tasks. So I did a lot of long running, I'll tell you a long story about that PE program, it's great, but I did my first half marathon when I was 11 and things like that. So I did a lot of long running while doing other sports and did a bunch of sports in high school, two sports in college and then running was kind of last step. Finishing my last college season, it had gone really well, I started a graduate program to become a teacher and during that year, I spent a lot of time working in the track office at Stanford and deciding for sure that I never wanted to be a coach, I was doing all these grunt jobs for all the whole meets and different things like that and it was rough and I was like, oh, this is terrible, I'll never do this. But long story short, I ended up doing it much sooner than I ever thought.

And you played soccer as well as ran track. What events did you run on the track?

So I probably would have considered myself a half-miler until maybe my sophomore year in college and then Vin Lananna, who was my coach at Stanford, really kept telling me that my best event was going to be the mile and he was right. It took me a while to kind of agree. But I enjoyed the four-by-four a lot, too. We, high school, we won a state championship in the four-by-four and at Stanford in those days in the early 90s, we didn't really have a lot of personnel at that time. There was, you know, a big transition when Brooks Johnson left and Vin came in. It took him a while to kind of build up numbers again. And so I ran a ton of four-by-fours in my first couple years, which wasn't that great for the team, but it was really helpful for me and I really enjoyed, you know, being a part of that type of thing. But I ended up being best at the first 100.

And Vin Lananna eventually twisted your arm to come help him as an assistant. How did that happen?

Well, I had, like I said, I was working in the track office a bit while I was doing my grad school and then I took a teaching position in middle school, actually in the city, the city where I live now and my husband or boyfriend at the time was playing a little bit of football and at the time it was in Indianapolis. So at the end of that next school year, I took a job with USA Track & Field actually in the national office for a short time working for Craig Nasback and my husband's football career ended fairly quickly and he got a job back at Stanford and I also got a job back at Stanford and we came back pretty quickly. My job was in the athletic advising area and one day I was in the mail room and Vin came up to me and I think Beth Alford Sullivan had just taken her spot at Penn State as head coach and he just was not expecting it. He asked me if I'd be interested in thinking about this position and next thing I knew I was calling recruits.

The rest is history. So you got to work with Sarah Hall and Lauren Fleshman as at least two names during your time as assistant to Vin at Stanford. What was it like working with athletes like that?

Well, I think, obviously I was very young and I didn't have a kind of coaching experience if any at the time other than just camps. So I think one of the things I did bring to the table is a fairly good institutional knowledge of the school. So I felt really comfortable interacting with the student athletes there and that includes students who are interested in Stanford, who might have that school as a part of the list of schools that they're interested in or the type of school that they're interested in. So I felt that to be fairly seamless. I wasn't that old myself and I had grown up not necessarily physically around Stanford but I have a lot of family history there and so I felt very comfortable in that environment and comfortable with the type of student-athletes that were attracted to that environment. That went great. I mean, Stanford's, I think, each school has its strengths and liabilities and each population of students have things that go really well for them and things that are more difficult for them and Stanford's got its own set of those. So it's not like it was every day with rainbows and sunshines and uniforms. We definitely, each day, as any coach does, had our set of challenges, you know, as the coaches there now or any school have. But you know, I was familiar with those challenges because I had just gone through it myself.

Before we jump into the more serious part of this discussion, what's it like seeing Sarah Hall doing what she's doing now, still PR-ing at the marathon all these years later after leaving Stanford and then of course Lauren having the career that she had and now using her voice in such a powerful way in this sport? What's that like seeing that?

Well, I think sometimes, for me, it's an interesting thing because I just see them as just being themselves like doing the thing that they would just naturally do. Sometimes, I almost forget that other people outside, there's a whole bunch of people who are coming into contact with their voices or their opinions and strongly held views and commitment to various things and personalities and just being like, whoa, who is this? Because I think both of them, and I wouldn't single them out as necessarily the only people, they're certainly in their own ways, gathering a lot of attention right now. But there are many folks from the program who have taken opportunities to, yeah, spoken about various different subjects and things like that. But yeah, I mean, Lauren, I think I myself, I've described to some folks like, when Vin was coaching me and I was an undergraduate, we had sometimes a contentious relationship, like just I tend to be a little bit of a rabble rouser and he tends to be a little bit of a rabble rouser. So Lauren, who tends to be a little bit of a rabble rouser, that's just her being her. So I really think in her case, sometimes I wince because she does take some stands publicly that I'm like, that's going to blow back at her a little bit. And so I kind of sometimes, probably an older sister kind of way, worry a little bit for her sometimes when she invites a lot of blowback with some stuff she steps out on. But she's, I think a lot of people have benefited from her having the courage of her convictions. And I don't think that'll change. And I think she's an important voice. And certainly, I don't think a lot of people realize all the work that she's put in over the past several years as a part of the USATF Board of Directors, like the actual board board, you know, that is not just about showing up at AAC meetings every once in a while or this or that. It's a lot of boring, you know, and tedious meetings and procedures and stuff behind the scenes. And she's really taken up that mantle. And I think really tried to affect change and, you know, USATF, as we know, is a large unwieldy organization that's very diverse and has a lot of different viewpoints and a lot of disagreement on a lot of issues within its ranks. And so that is not an easy task. And I think she, I think people don't realize all the work she's put in on that front among all the other ways in which she's kind of out front, you know, on Twitter or other ways. Sarah, I think, in her own way, you know, she's obviously in the last few years with, you know, growing into the role of motherhood and parenthood along with Ryan, you know, that's been awesome to see. She's someone that's been close to our family and our kids. They were really young. And so it's wonderful to see her in that role and figuring out how to balance those things. And it's just, you know, amazing to see how well she has done that. It doesn't surprise me at all that she's doing the longer distances and thriving at that, you know. I remember days when I was coaching her and she was in college, you know, and she'd call back from the summer, you know, Ryan and I were at Jim Ryan's camp and we got lost in some two and a half hour run, like into the woods and, you know, around her hometown in Santa Rosa. You know, she just really thrived kind of in that nature going for a long run and just kind of just running long. She just enjoys running and being out there. And I think to do the longer events, you really need to kind of actually just a few weeks ago, had an informal conversation with Jerry Schumacher who said this exact same thing. Like if you're going to do the marathon, you really need to kind of love running. And she's a person I would describe as a person who loves running. So I think she also enjoys going fast and she enjoyed those years where she was doing shorter distances and she's unafraid of a challenge. Certainly she's done pretty much every event in the book. But she loves running and so we always are excited to, I think, as a running community, you know, you probably say this yourself as a coach of adults, myself as a coach of adults, post collegiate athletes in particular, we love to see somebody get to the age where they're able to realize some great performances in their prime and not have given that before then. And so that's really inspiring to see and I don't think she's near done yet. So the last I heard Ryan was getting a little bit of shape too, so watch.

He says he's going to help. But that is cool to hear that they're basically living how you saw them then. There's no surprises, I guess.

Well, that's untrue. There's always surprises.

Fair enough.

That is the part that's not a surprise.

Nice. So let's talk about the Mary Cain story, obviously, as someone who's involved in the sport, you've been, I'm sure, following that. What were your reactions when you first watched Mary's video?

Well, I think that, you know, rolling back, I can't remember the first thing I saw that flashed up that this had gone live. I can't remember if it was like a tweet I saw or something. Somebody texted it to me, or I can't remember. But in that space between kind of being aware that this was out there and then going and engaging with the material itself, you know, maybe I'm not alone in this feeling of having kind of like a variety of flashbacks, thinking about her, just watching her through the years in a variety of different contexts and kind of, you know, the times when you were super happy for how things were going for her and then times where, you know, you were concerned that this wasn't going as well for her as it seemed to be initially. So I was kind of almost bracing myself, I think, to watch the video or to engage with the material and especially after the first mere times and subsequent kind of piece of info came forth, including the podcast she did with Karen and Shanna, just here, you know, a few days ago. I think it's just really difficult to hear what she's gone through, partly because you can see the common threads with, you know, athletes, other athletes that, you know, each of us may come into contact. I can think back to athletes I've come into contact with who have had difficulties with these issues, you know, and flashing back to all the difficult conversations I may have had with athletes around these issues, and, you know, start to second guess everything I've ever told anybody about anything, you know, like, where did I do it wrong? Man, I really should have, you know, known more about this or, you know, how can we do this better? So, it was a lot of, like, a lot of self-examination, honestly, kind of, you know, feeling like, wow, should somebody have done something to have helped her? Should I have done something more to help people that I have interacted with? Where have I gone wrong? How can I grow from it? Nobody should have to go through feeling that way. So, it's a whole big ball of Christmas lights, I think, for me, when I listen to that. But I think that one of the main things that I hope comes from it is that, you know, she really laid it all out there and not everybody has to see everything the same way to agree that as a result of that, there are more conversations that you had about the topic. And while not all those conversations are like 100% super positive and productive, it is a type of subject that I think has for quite a very, very long time been under wraps and been kind of the Wild West, you know. It's kind of like, I don't watch the Westworld very much, but it's kind of like this like separate reality and inside that reality is kind of like this Wild West out there, you know. But it's not something that publicly is very much discussed. So I'm hopeful that in the long run good comes of it because conversations will be had that will hopefully lead towards, you know, productive relationships between coaches and athletes, coaches and parents, coaches and each other, teammates and each other, that might not have occurred otherwise because there wasn't some sort of common thread to use as a catalyst for those conversations. And now we have them.

Yeah, this conversation being one of those, frankly, as it was spurred by that, by Mary coming forward. As an athlete, what was your experience in this area? Did you have anything that you could relate to from her story in any way?

I think that my perspective on all this is that all of us is kind of an inclusive way of thinking about this. Every single female, whether an athlete or not an athlete, falls somewhere along a spectrum of how they're feeling about their body and their own self perception. And even folks who are oftentimes feeling pretty positive can have moments where maybe a comment is said or even just as simple as trying on an outfit in a dressing room and saying, Oh, well, I think I should wear something that's a little bit more flattering, you know, and then flattering gets equated with slimming, which, you know, the ideal state becomes equated with being thinner. And that can happen outside of athletics. So it's not hard to understand how that might translate as an aesthetic in the athletics where you're out there and, you know, basically briefs and a bra top competing in front of people. I think that as a person who grew up in, you know, the 80s and went to college in the 90s, there was a lot less kind of supervision and regulation around how these conversations happened, and so you had a lot of variability in terms of females' experience. I was a person who was, you know, a person with a bigger frame than most of my competitors. That was true in high school. It's true in college. And I also had this element where I had soccer for half the year, which demanded a different type of athleticism to a certain extent than running middle distance. So it was something that I definitely had to pay attention to, and I managed, I think, sometimes better than others, in part because I didn't really have a ton of education about how to do so. You know, I would have conversations about this with Vin, and I didn't find any of those conversations troubling. But those conversations, I think, and he would probably agree, weren't, you know, scaffolded with the type of information and knowledge that either of us would have as coaches today when talking about these things, you know. So we would have a lot of frank conversations, and I had to manage it. But it was, you know, there wasn't, I wouldn't, I would say there was a very high possibility for folks, you know, my age and doing the things that I was doing to fall through the cracks because there just wasn't a lot of education about female triad and red S. That wasn't really something we talked about, you know. There was, you know, I think a pretty common just prescription of oral contraception as a way to solve problems with a lot more kind of drastic levels of estrogen than maybe might be prescribed today when that had its old set of side effects. And so it's just kind of the Wild West. And sometimes it worked out. I think that I, you know, escaped out of that, like intact relatively. But others weren't so lucky. And so I think all of us have benefited from the greater attention to this. And again, like this conversation is important to happen because it turns us on to other resources and other voices, other knowledge that we as coaches can gain to have a better, more informed conversations with athletes and to figure out ways even just to use our language in a better way to, you know, help performance versus causing harm.

You told me a story last time we talked about how a coach one time commented on your frame and how that gave you an advantage.

Tell that story. Yeah, so I reflected back on that in the last few days because this coach, in other contexts, I think other people would have felt that he would have said the exact opposite thing. So maybe it's just because he was trying to recruit me. But he was like, the big girl always beats the little girl in the last 100 meters. And as a person who was, you know, I mean, in high school, I was still about the same size, but I'm, you know, about five, nine, five, ten, about 150 pounds. And I was, you know, running the mile against, you know, girls who weren't that size. Let's just say that, you know, and that was meant to be an encouragement to me, which I held on to. I was like, yeah, you know, I'm, you know, going to mow people down in the last 150. But, and it didn't occur to me that that's probably a vastly different message than a lot of girls got. And certainly, like I said, I think in this particular case, other people would have been very surprised to have heard that he would have made that comment. But, yeah, and I don't even know, I mean, that's, that's uniformly true, but it encouraged me at the time because that was something that, it's not that I was, I couldn't hide from my friend. I was kind of proud of it, to tell you the truth. I'm a little bit stubborn that way. So I didn't necessarily shy away from it, but it just was what it was.

In some context, though, that could have been a dangerous comment for some, right?

Yeah, and I think that's the thing that's like scary as a coach is that, you know, I guess it's just humans. Like you just, you really don't want to cause, you really don't want to cause any harm. You want to encourage people towards positive, positive behavior and positive outcome. And all of us at times say things that are received incorrectly by those who are hearing them. And, you know, a generation ago, there was just probably a lot less sensitivity to how that might be received. And also, I think probably more of, you know, that I think the scales were tipped more towards, hey, you got to be able to deal with that, you know. The coach tells you you need to lose weight or do whatever you need to do. Like, well, you got to be tough enough to deal with that. Like, that's on you, you know. Whereas I think now we're a little bit more like, hold up. Like, who's the adult? Like, should that adult, you know, be able to communicate in a way that's positive, that's not really on this teenager to glean from this kind of course series of comments what the positives were out of that, you know. And I also think that, you know, there's so much difference in the way that we do distance running these days compared to those days. Certainly, I mean, it's not like the 90s we were, I mean, we obviously had some, you know, a few people running very fast, but the 90s weren't that amazing time, you know, for US distance running, you know. And certainly before then, there wasn't a ton of huge pool of females who had come through. So while we have people that we recognize now as trailblazers and people that I would have looked up to at that time, you know, it's not like they were brought in to talk to us or that, you know, there was no sort of the way that, I don't even know this is really the case now, but there was no internet where you could kind of read their comments in an interview or, you know, interact with them at this meet because they came to sign autographs or it just, you know, there wasn't that much knowledge about how we do things. And there were a lot of kind of old school, like, you know, glorification of old school methods, I think. Whereas now, if you consider, you know, the things that people do, even like who had heard of a foam roller, you know, it was, I remember, you know, in college, I was like, here's this thing called a stretching book. You know, I think about the different, you know, now we're doing ice baths, now we're not doing ice baths, you know, now we're doing strides after everything. Now we're doing, you know, workouts after the races and we've got the altergy and we're, you know, just different. We just do distance running, like, in a much more comprehensive way. You know, let's talk about, like, our fluid consumption on long runs and, like, make sure the balance of your electrolytes is right. Like, you know, none of that, right? So, I can't even remember what your question is, Chris, sorry. But it's changed a lot since then. So I think our conversations have changed a lot as well.

Would you agree as a coach that you should avoid any commentary characterizing someone's size, even if it's intended to be positive?

Think that it's always kind of a little bit of a slippery slope to always say avoid, avoid, avoid. This is just a perspective that I have generally. I think it is much more productive in our lives generally and in this case particularly to think about what we should emphasize. I think we should emphasize conversations around performance and capabilities and outcomes. When you're doing that, you're not really focused on an appearance or a number other than say a result or a split or whatever. Does that make sense? That's the way I kind of think about it. I think it would be very difficult to go throughout the day thinking, I can't say this, I can't say this, I can't say this, I can't say this. I'd rather think I'm going to focus on these things as much as I can and make sure that that message gets across as best I can so my emphasis is clear.

So what did that look like for you? And maybe take me back to the Sanford days and then how that has evolved for you to now when you're coaching a club of adult athletes.

Yeah, well certainly coaching, you know, fresh high schoolers to college and then coaching people who are 20s, 30s, 40s and older is, you know, a different ball of wax. They're going through different things in their lives, they're at different points in their understanding of themselves as runners just experience-wise, you know, and their bodies are at different points, certainly, as I well know, as a 40-something runner myself. But, and I also think definitely like 20 years ago, I, you know, was not nearly as confident in having these conversations and I was fresh off the boat myself, so, you know, these were difficult things. I think one thing that, you know, a little morsel that I took from Vin, and I know I share this with Lauren and kind of the way that we characterize these things, is to really talk about these things in the context of a lot of different factors. So, I think one danger of talking about body or weight or related issues is kind of glorifying it, putting it kind of on the throne where it's like so special that like, now we're going to have a conversation about your eating habits. Like, that's only going to end with everybody stressing out about it, right? If you kind of like drum roll and then have this conversation, you know? And at the same time, you also want to recognize that one, if somebody's off the path that they should be on in those areas, it's probably deeper than just what they're deciding to put in their mouth or not put in their mouth. And two, there's a bajillion other potential factors that might be coming into play with what's going on with that person. And if the goal is ultimately to get that person in a position where they can get the most out of themselves, whether they are a superstar or whether they are a contributor, whatever their goal is, you want to just have them in a place where they can perform at their best, there could be a lot of different factors involved. So if it, you know, obviously you want to build a relationship where you've opened the door to communication about these things before there's a problem. So that takes a little bit of work. But if you do find yourself at a time where you do need to, you know, unpack what's going on and try to figure out how we can get the ship back on course, that conversation's got to include, you know, an examination of everything that's going on, one of which might be, you know, struggles in this area. So for me, context in the larger picture is really important, both because I think that we unfairly give it this thrown position that just makes everybody stressed out. And two, because usually there's something going on behind the surface and just dealing with the eating issues doesn't really, it's like a band-aid that doesn't fix the wound.

So what would you say to that person that says, you can't avoid the concept of racing weight, lighter equals faster. And maybe they'll even give you the caveats of to a point, or as long as your habits are overall healthy. But it seems like there's this tension in the debate now between it doesn't matter at all, at least it shouldn't be a focus at all. And of course, it has to be a focus because at some level, weight and performance are tied. So how do you think about that?

Okay, so a couple thoughts. One, if I told you Chris, okay, listen, your kick stinks.

It does, by the way. It does, by the way.

You got to pick it up. You got to really go for it over the last 200 or whatever. Okay, some conversation like that. You're like, okay, yeah, yeah, I got to go for it. I got it. My kicks got to get better. I got to run faster. Okay, so what exactly are you telling yourself to do in order to get your body to travel over the ground faster? Like, there are certain things you have to tell yourself. Like, are you increasing your cadence? Are you putting your arms in a different position? Are you taking pains to change your posture or relax your shoulder? You know, there are certain things you are actually doing that will result in you potentially running faster over the last 200, right? So, I think that in a conversation about, like, well, Chris, I think you need to be XYZ race weight, which is probably not a conversation that I would have. But if we were to say to have that conversation, what is it that you were actually going to do? That may be true, just like it may be true that you need to run faster over the last 200. But the more important conversation as a coach is, like, how can we get you doing the things you need to do to be performing at your optimum, you know, capabilities? Which may mean at that time you end up being at that approximate weight, but that's just not really, that's like cart before the horse. It's like the things you were actually doing are the habits that are really important that will eventually lead you to be in that position.

Well, I think we agree on that point. I made a comment or at least discussed in my podcast two episodes ago that my approach as a coach is that healthy inputs equals healthy outputs. And when things go wrong is when you, as you said, put the cart before the horse and you pick some arbitrary output as the end all and be all, which then causes you to twist or do weird things to the inputs in order to just get there. And I think sometimes weight becomes that thing that everybody's striving for because they think it's the end all and be all to get a certain performance. When really, really it's just whatever your, quote unquote, race weight is, is really just that weight you happen to be when you're healthy and performing your best.

And you've got sustainable habits, you know, that are something that you, I mean, if it's something you can only do for like a week or two, and it's like so drastic, that probably, you know, those are some reconsideration. You know, because that's probably, you know, I think sustainable habits are something that we want to encourage. But similarly, if you told me, Chris, okay, I want to, what's a random goal? I want to get some arbitrary number in this race. Then, well, we know kind of what the pace is to get to that race. But as a coach, the way I think about it is I look at the types of workouts that might, you know, influence your ability to be able to perform that way. And I try to kind of give you, you know, put you in a position so all the data points in these variety of different types of sessions would give you a reasonable chance to think that you could go out there and do what you were hoping to do. You know, can't run the race for you and the end product is all yours. But as a coach, I would hope to, like, put you in a position where you don't have to jump that far from here. You know what I'm saying? Similarly, in this type of issue, some of that may not necessarily be a remit if it does require a real deep examination of nutritional habits. But in terms of just influencing an athlete, my hope would always be to just have you on a road and put you in a position so that your data points indicated that you were in the ballpark for the performance that you were hoping for. And then that performance comes from having a profile that matches up with the performance versus the performance. We don't know how you got there. Nobody ever, I used to say, my college coaching did, nobody ever climbs to the top of the podium at the NCAA and is like, I have no idea how I got here. This is just a great coincidence. What a magical moment. What did I do? I can't even remember anything I did over the course of the season. People who end up in that spot know darn well exactly what they've done. They've worked very hard. And yeah, you don't always get the gold medal at the end of everything you do. But when you do, you most of the time know what you put in to get there. And that's the important thing.

So my approach as a coach on nutrition, even weight, is generally to avoid it altogether. I don't really see it as my job. Again, I'm coaching adult athletes that are paying me to do that. And my job is to help give them their goals and have marathons and marathons. And so I focus on the running elements, perhaps some strength elements, mobility elements, recovery elements, all the things that fall in my purview as a coach, sometimes the mental elements. And in general, if somebody comes to me and says, hey, what about eating habits or weight? Then my general answer is either don't worry about that, focus on the running, let that work, help manage itself. Or here are some resources you can go to. We have partners that I will refer people to if that's something they really want to focus on. So for you, how does that part of the conversation go?

I think much the same. It depends a little bit on the person, how long you've known them and what the relationship is. But I definitely have had people say, I'd like to train for a marathon. Will you coach me? I'd like to lose weight. And I say to themselves, well, I am a running coach. I will help you run the marathon. Whether or not you lose weight is a separate topic. That's a separate thing. So I definitely have, I'm with you on having kind of that focus. I try to keep the first thing the first thing. And like you, there's folks I refer people to in the community or if that's not a good fit for whatever reason, try to encourage them to find a fit that works. Because some people do, sometimes they get to their adult life and it's the first time they've had an opportunity to really kind of work on these things and build some healthy habits, so you want to encourage that for sure. But I usually am pretty, you know, I'm a running coach and that's what I'm here to help you do. Which is a little bit different than college athletes because you are kind of just given this, you spend time with these athletes in the recruiting process, their parents kind of look at you as the kind of the conduit between them and school and to kind of handle all sorts of things that go on with a student that aren't really like completely related to like, you know, how many 400s you ran on Tuesday. So that's a little bit of a difficult thing, but thankfully it seems like more and more that universities have people in place to make those handoffs a little bit more seamless and easy. And more, I think sometimes it's awkward to have rules and regulations about that within a particular department. Sometimes I think it feels limiting for coaches who are used to being able to have a little bit more flexibility in how they handle different situations. I think ultimately the intention there is good to protect the student athlete and make sure that someone's looking after them and like paying attention to what's going on with them and also to pay attention to the coach and allow them to, you know, to focus on the X's and O's, which is the best thing.

What about situations where you might see a situation where you think somebody might actually have unhealthy habits, whether that be an eating disorder itself or disordered eating and you have those suspicions, what do you do? How do you approach that conversation with somebody if it's a concern? Well.

It depends on the context. Through my mind, I'm thinking of all sorts of things. There's a lot of things that aren't really any of your business. That's sometimes difficult because it's hard to know if you're necessarily providing more help than harm if you're wading into a situation that didn't require your participation. A meeting with yourself. I talk about this in the context of coaching in general. If you're coaching yourself or doing your own workouts and you're just having a meeting with yourself, sometimes it doesn't go well. My shin is sore. Should I do this workout anyway? Let's have a meeting. I think I want to do the workout. Well, that might be a bad outcome for having that meeting with yourself. If you had an additional person in that meeting, you might come up with a result that would help you. I think in some of these issues, just encouraging folks to... You may not necessarily know what the right person is or where they are, but encouraging people to speak to someone with whom they can have those meetings with. Like, wow, I don't feel like I'm where I should be and having somebody who they trust who can say, who can provide some feedback. So it's not just saying, well, reverb feedback in their own head, which is kind of where we all sometimes go down, we get off the path when that's the case. But sometimes it's really difficult because not everybody has somebody like that in their lives. So that can be a tricky process, but that's kind of generally what I encourage people to do, is to try to open up to an ally. And that may or may not need to be myself. Sometimes it definitely needs to not be me, just because it would be better for, you know, just for a variety of reasons. When people are adults, it's really difficult because they, you know, they're not showing up to you six days a week. You know, they're not on scholarship, you know. And adults sometimes have found themselves over the course of years in habitual places that are really difficult to unwind themselves out of. So it's challenging.

So taking that a little bit broader, and you say I'll ask you to answer this question for yourself because you can't necessarily speak for others, and I know we're all figuring it out. But as coaches, sometimes it's hard because we're on the verge of playing a lot of different experts, even though we may not be. At some level, we might be asked to play a doctor role when someone has an injury, or to play a nutritionist role when somebody is asking about what they should eat, or maybe a therapist role when they're talking about some of their mental challenges that might be holdups in racing. In addition to, of course, playing that coach role and understanding the X's and O's of workouts. So for you, how do you figure out that balance between stepping into those situations and giving what you know and saying, hey, that's not my world, go to this person?

That is really difficult because a lot of people, a lot of coaches are in coaching because they want to help people. And so I think that's kind of the default stance. I don't know if you agree with that, Chris. And so I'd like to say that I have had it all figured out. But, you know, like many of us have been doing anything for a lot of years, you know, there's times when you've done things well and times you've done things poorly. All you can do is kind of learn from those times and hopefully be a better version of yourself for the next person who comes along. But, you know, after all, we are all human. And I think, like I said, I think the challenge for me is sometimes I want to fix everything. And sometimes it's just not possible, you know, or not realistic and not the right choice.

As we think about this topic specifically in the context of women and younger women, how do you think it's nuanced there or is it at all, especially when we're talking about having periods versus not having periods and what's healthy related to menstruation? There's a lot of information out there that I think male coaches may struggle with because they can't relate and because maybe it's a taboo topic. So talk about that side of it.

I've said for a long time, people ask, what's the one thing you would tell a high school athlete? I would say make sure you're having conversations with your parents and your coaches about your menstrual cycle. So I think too often that conversation gets delayed and put off as, oh, she's just developing late or oh, she's just doing all this running. Then you kind of get to college and it's a big disaster. So I think those conversations early can help get everybody on the same team, understanding what's going on and be paying attention to the athlete and the whole person and making sure that nutritionally and every other way they're on the right track with the hope being for longevity and for enjoying the sport and for the opportunity to feel at your best and get better. So I think those are important conversations. I think that menstruation is just something that your body does. Again, like I was saying about putting these topics on the throne artificially, you know, you can have a conversation about getting the flu shot. You can have a conversation about, you know, using shockwave therapy on shin splints. I mean, you can have a conversation about all sorts of things about the best way to treat Achilles, you know, tendonitis. Menstruation is something that is normal and is just a bodily function. It's super important and it's, you know, sometimes a canary in the coal mine for other things that are also really important. So we need to talk about it and we need to take it out of this scary zone and make it not a big deal. Granted, the average adolescent female may not feel totally comfortable talking about that with the average adult male potentially, in which case all involved should make sure that, again, that there is somebody involved who is in a position to have those conversations and make sure that communication is happening. Problems that are small problems that aren't talked about oftentimes end up being big problems. Even big problems, if they're being worked through by a team or, you know, a partnership, can be solved.

So what do you think on that note, starting with high school or collegiate programs, what needs to change systematically in order to make sure that the right conversations are happening and the right resources are available for an athlete in these situations?

Well, I'm not sure I know. I'm in a position to know what needs to change because I'm not sure I necessarily know, you know, there's, this country is a big place and certainly there are people in other countries who are doing a good job and some who are not doing a good job and those voices are important as well. We run our stuff in the United States in this particular way, whereas other countries, they often take a longer-term approach to development. As Lauren Fleshm alluded to in her op-ed last weekend, you know, your running career should be long and fruitful and your high school and college time should be only one period of that. So whereas in the United States, we spend a lot of time kind of putting a lot of pressure on kids in that particular timeframe, somewhat artificially at the time when their bodies are going through a lot of changes. So I think one thing for me is probably to have more understanding of the idea of the running career as being like a longer-term thing. That's really difficult for college coaches who are getting hired and fired by how their team does in a particular year. And so they're under a lot of pressure to have results. And I think that's just kind of an out, you know, that's just a byproduct of the way we treat sports in general and the way that we've kind of lionized collegiate athletics to a certain extent in our culture. So there is this pressure even in sports like ours that aren't necessarily quote-unquote the revenue sports. So I think there's a bigger picture thing that probably needs to change about how we kind of do athletics. But everybody being on the same page that the goal is for like a long-term successful career where the athlete can succeed at the time when they're most ready for it, which is those years after college, would be great. And I think that there's a lot of different things that schools both at the high school level and at the college level do now that they didn't probably do a generation or two ago. And keep in mind that like two generations ago, there weren't a lot of women doing this. I mean, like the numbers of females participating in these sports just were so much fewer. So I think both high school and collegiate athletics are more used to dealing with male athletes over the course of generations than female athletes. I think the learning firms had to be really steep and quick. But I think there's lots of things that high schools and colleges do now, people that they have in place, they didn't use to have. And folks who are prepared to kind of deal with health issues, mental and physical, related to female athletes is something that's really crucial. And just like an athletic trainer is there to take your ankles, you know, this is an important piece of it too. And there should be somebody available to be there as a resource for these athletes if you're going to ask them to do these really difficult things and make these demands. Certainly the money is there in most cases.

And what about coaching education? You know, coaching is a little bit notoriously lean in running in terms of actually having formal and let's say thorough formal certification processes. I mean, you can go spend a weekend and get a USATF certification or get an RRCA, Roadrunners Club of America certification. But that's mostly focused on the X's and O's of coaching and training methods versus some of these other topics like we're discussing now. So, what needs to change there to help equip coaches with better information on this stuff?

Again, I can't say if I had the answer to that, boy, I'd be pushing for it. You know, I think that we've come a long way in terms of starting to have more uniformity and seeking kind of professionalism within the sport in terms of certifications or having prior qualifications or even just safe sports, although it's not free of its own problems, but you know, there's some steps being taken towards these directions and I think that younger coaches coming in are going to be more used to these hoops to jump through than folks our age or older who are like, what do you mean, I've got to go do this? You know, I've never had to do this before. So, there's going to be more acceptance for those types of things. But I also think that, I don't think we've yet clearly defined what shared set of values we need to impress upon young coaches coming up. I have people that I speak with and we probably have a shared set of values, but it's not clear to me that I'm on the same page as somebody else in another corner of the sport. Our sport is very diverse, very large. So, that's a difficult issue. I think that, and I'm not necessarily sure that even USATF would be the appropriate vehicle for that, because, just for a variety of reasons, it's an administrative governing body. But whatever happens, I think that it's important that the athletes are really driving the process, because the perception of athletes coming through is what is really crucial here. The experience of athletes is what's really crucial coming through here. You can have a bunch of experts tell you, you know, it's kind of like corporate environments. They go into these big seminars on various different subjects they need to be aware of. And sometimes those is really good information. But if those aren't grounded in real experiences or real issues, real problems from the perspective of people who had difficulty with those issues in the past, then it's going to be hollow and fall on deaf ears and not really be effective. So thankfully we have groups like the AAC, we have groups like the group that Christian Taylor is putting together. I mean, that's obviously working more towards economic opportunities. But there are obviously a lot of powerful voices out there both on this set of issues as well as, you know, it's like Lucia Montano who's been working on issues related to maternity. We have a lot of powerful athlete voices out there and I don't think any solution is going to be complete without really taking into account the experiences and needs of athletes. But I think we're still in early days as to figuring out what that should look like.

It's a good point though in that the athletes should be involved, should have a voice there. But also, they do have some power and with these topics now at the forefront, I think there is an opportunity for athletes and for parents of athletes, especially for those younger athletes, to go and now equip with more information about what they want to know about a coach in a certain environment or what they should expect from a coach in a certain environment or what they may want to see from a coach in a certain environment and then hopefully make better decisions about programs to join or in some cases, if it's an adult athlete choosing a coach, about which coach to choose and what they might want to look for in a coach and how they would approach these topics, which would give that power to the athlete to hopefully make choices as to what's going to be best for them.

For sure, and I think that educated athletes is really important. Both, again, like back to my original point, like Mary Cain's telling of her story is now going to make that conversation come up with a lot of parents and kids in the recruiting process, which is going to, one, allow parents and kids to evaluate the environments their kids are going to be going into, and then two, it's going to encourage coaches to make sure that they're on point with what they're prepared for these questions. They are doing the best job they can to be able to help these athletes in these ways, and I think that it's going to be an uncomfortable thing. Like I said, I look back at all the conversations I've ever had, and I'm like, oh, gosh, I should have done better there and I should have done differently here. I think all coaches kind of go through that, but that's an uncomfortable process that hopefully pushes you towards being a better person at what you do, so I think that's good. I mean, I relate it back to when I was at Stanford, I would read the Let's Run message boards because I knew that parents would sometimes read those and then have like kind of wackety questions, you know, based on something they read there. And so, like, I mean, this happened more than once where I would read and there'd be some thread about something that just wasn't true or just, you know, something out of left field, and then sure enough, like a couple weeks later, a parent would be like, so tell me about this. Do you have everybody running 95 miles a week? You know, or something like that. You know, it was nice to be prepared. I mean, it wasn't fun reading, you know, some of the stuff on there. But the drill was to be able to thoughtfully answer concerns that a parent might have, you know. So sometimes you kind of take the hits in order to be able to make sure that you're doing your job well. And this might be the catalyst for something.

Yeah. And if you're a coach, as you said, you've probably made a mistake, but this is a good time to self-reflect and hopefully all together elevate our conversations on this topic. So thank you, Dena. I appreciate you joining me and being willing to open up and talk about your perspectives. I know, as I said in my intro, none of us have all the answers. We're figuring it out, but the conversation hopefully helps us all get to a better place. And I appreciate you taking the time to help us do that.

Thanks, Chris. I appreciate you including me in the conversation.

Dena Evans, everyone. Thanks to her for joining me and for sharing her perspective. Definitely, definitely helpful for me and hopefully helpful for you as well. Thanks, of course, to you as always for listening. If you want more about Rogue Running, you can always check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Instagram, Twitter or Facebook at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.