Hey, everybody, welcome to episode 395 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung, joined by co-host James Dodds. Back to you after a week away. I was out of the office last week traveling for spring break with the family. Had a little bit of time in the sun, and I'm happy to be back with you. This week, as we dive into the what, the how, the tactics of each period over the next several episodes, we're going to start today by talking about base building. Chapter 10 of the book, there's kind of two parts to this chapter, but we'll walk through both parts in one single episode today. But first, how are you, James?

I'm doing well. I've been focusing on my sleep routine, and what's interesting is we're going to cover that today. So I'm like, wow, I'm actually tasting the benefits of healthy sleep. So I'm like, I can speak to it authentically. How about you? How are you doing?

Nice. Well, it is amazing when you get your sleep dialed, how everything else seems to fall into place. I lived a lot of my life not getting enough sleep, but I've been prioritizing that over the last several years, and I can feel the difference.

Yeah, it's unbelievable. And it's funny, because I've taught it for years, you've taught it for years. It's like we know conceptually the value, but then there's also the discipline of making it happen.

Yeah. And it's one of those things I think we can cheat, because the body adapts to not having it pretty well. At least, you know, you don't notice the long-term disadvantages of sleep deprivation until much later.

Yeah.

In the near term, you can figure it out, you can lock in, your body adapts to basically operating without it, or you compensate with caffeine or whatever else. So, I think that's part of the challenge, is we don't see the long-term effects of it until much later in life. And anyway, we'll talk about sleep for sure. Don't want to linger on it now, because we'll have some of that in the meat of the episode, but it is important.

Yeah.

Needless to say.

Yeah.

I think you had a different question. Do you want to open with?

You know, I really enjoyed getting the opportunity to just sort of free flow about why I coach, because you had asked me that a couple of weeks ago. And I was like, I think there's some value in asking you the same. I know we cross over quite a lot, and we've been at part of Rogue for a long time, but still I'd rather just hear it in your words and not assume everything is exactly the same. So why do you coach? Can we kick off with that?

Sure, it's a fun question. I always like answering it. I mean, certainly there's really kind of two parts to it, I think, for me, as I think about it. One is where I think we heavily overlap, which is just that impact on humans and the ripple effect of it. I think that's one of the big reasons, and it's certainly about the running, but it's about so much more and seeing people find confidence, build self-esteem, be able to find competence in running that then translates to competence in other parts of their life and work and relationships and whatever else, then that's a big part of it. I do it because of that, and you give that to one person, and then that affects then the people around them, whether they're running or not in some ways. I've coached one woman, I think, about in my group here in Austin, since the very beginning of starting my Rogue Austin group in 2010. So it'll be, what, 16 years in September. I've been coaching her, and I've seen her raise her kids. They're both now college graduates. She's still getting faster into her 50s. And so to have seen the ripple effect of running in her life, but also in her family's life, because I know her kids, they know me. They quote me to her sometimes. And so it's just fun to see that ripple effect with the people I get to touch and work with. So that's a big part of it. The second part, to me, is a little bit different. It's, I feel an obligation to it in a sense that people might use different language or words for this. But I believe wholeheartedly that I was born to do this. That my skills, however you believe those came to be, were specifically crafted to help people in this way. And it's going to sound weird, but I had this kind of weird experience one time where I was giving, I think I've told you this story, but I was given a talk on the Austin Marathon Course Strategy. We used to do an in-person talk on that every year. Still do typically some version of that, but mostly virtual these days. But I was doing that in front of a crowd in our old building here in Austin. Probably had 100 plus people there. And I had done it several times. So I always bring new wrinkles, but there's a lot of the same themes because it's more or less the same course since, it's been more or less the same course since early 2010 range. And I remember having this kind of weird experience where, call it an out-of-body experience, call it a dual-minded experience, I'm not sure, where I was, part of me, my conscience was apart from the speech. And it was like observing myself giving the speech. And part of me was obviously doing it, but it was, I guess, it was so ingrained in me that talk that I could have this dual-conscious kind of experience where I was sort of watching myself give the speech. And so this created this weird experience. But in that experience, I remember part of my conscience being like, wow, this is a weird thing, to have all these people watching me intently give a talk on a very, very specific niche of content, right? Which is how you run the Austin Marathon course. And in that moment, I realized, okay, well, I was actually specifically crafted to do what I do in terms of the skill sets that I have. But not just the kind of intellectual and intuition skill sets, but also the relational skill sets. And so I believe at some level, I'm obligated to do what I do. Now, I used to feel that I had to sort of fulfill that obligation, that it was a contract with me in the universe, or me and God, or however you want to think about it. I don't necessarily feel that way anymore. And so it's more something I get to do, but I also am uniquely crafted to do it. So I feel some sense of obligation to deliver on this weird kind of skill set that I was given to help people in this specific way. So that's another part of it.

That's really cool. Like a calling or a purpose or a mission, like a meaning. Like I get that.

Yeah, exactly. Which is cool. Everybody wants to find that thing they were put on earth for, and I believe that I have found it somehow, you know, in this random walk that can be life. And that's pretty... That makes it fulfilling. Unique to obviously all the impact that can have on people.

Yeah, that's really awesome.

So there you go. A little meta.

I love that.

A little meta woo woo storytelling to start this one.

No, I think a lot of people will relate, because if we tried to codify that and make it some thing that people should take on, like, here's how to step outside your body and see yourself, and then it would get weird and woo woo. But I think a lot of people have had certain moments where they're like, is that that feeling of like, I don't know what the truth is, but I know it when I hear it. Like that it feels like that. And I remember reading a book, Extreme Ownership by Jaco Willink and AB. Seale, and he talks about the skill of detachment and teaching guys when under fire, how to breathe deeply, almost come up to the 30,000 view and be able to see, like, what is my aim? So he's, like, tactically teaching people how to take on fire and still have a clear head. But I think we as people, that lesson came because he had enough experience and enough, he was surrounded by it enough, that he codified it in that specific realm. But we stumble upon these moments as people, and we don't always know what to make of them, and I'm not going to try to go beyond that. I'm just going to say, I think a lot of people do have those little moments where they're like, I don't know, like, for some reason, I'm doing this task or this skill set or that occupation. That just registers with me. The more words you put to it, the more you mess it up. You're just sort of like, I don't know why, but I must. Not that I must, but that I must. You know?

Yeah, that's a good way to put it. And yeah, hard to explain, but I can only explain it in the words that seem to fit what I experienced. So there you go. All right, is that a good intro?

Yeah, way to pull the thread and follow it and go after it. So you've obviously had impact.

So I love it. All right. Well, we're going to step into base building again. This one kind of comes in two parts in the book. We've got a 10A chapter and a 10B chapter. And then we'll subsequently in later chapters, stepped into step into the other phases of training and get more specific. But we're going to start here with the foundation, and more details on how to lay an appropriate foundation for whatever training block you might be doing. And in some ways, I'm glad we're spending a dedicated episode on this because I think sometimes people brush it off or kind of skip over it in their head. They're like, well, I have to do it. It's a means to an end. I'm going to get the mileage I need in order to really train. But they kind of try to do it as fast as possible because the base building period in their head is boring. It's like, oh, I just got to run easy miles and get to a point where then I can do the real fun stuff. And yet, as we've talked about already in the series, the bigger your base, the higher your peak. So the base in some ways might be the most important block to establishing your potential from a given training cycle. And yet, we often want to fast forward through it or at least kind of skip ahead to the fun stuff, right? And so I'm glad that we get to linger here. And so we're going to talk about... I actually want to start with our second board, the benefits of the base, and then we can talk about kind of elements of how you do this. We're going to bring up Dr. Phil Mathfotone, who in some ways kind of codified or put math to what kind of base building can look like. We'll touch on that a little bit. That is mostly touched on in chapter 10a of the book, and then we're going to spend a little bit more time on 10b because Mathfotone's great, love his perspective, but it's not necessarily end all and be all of base building. So let's start with the benefits of base. From your perspective, beyond what I just mentioned in terms of bigger the base, higher the peak, what do you see are the benefits of the base period?

The first thought that comes to mind is, I don't know why, but I wanted to go straight to practical. But you mentioned that people want to do the quote fun stuff. The greatest benefit of the base is it grows how much fun you can have.

Right? I like that.

And I was even thinking about, well, I'm going to get off into an analogy, and I don't want to go there yet. But it's like, the number one benefit is that, I think. If we're looking for a carrot or a reward, it's like you come into a season where you've just been jogging and slogging 60-mile weeks. I mean, gosh, what we can put on your legs in the actual season itself becomes so much substantially greater because your body's set for it. And so that's when I realized I should maybe back off and just say, like, what are those benefits now? Because these aren't as sexy, but you've covered them before. But it's like, if you're going slow and you're patiently building the mileage, you'll get the bone density. And so you don't have to worry about, I don't want to say it like it's a guarantee, but generally speaking, you can be less concerned about stress fractures when you go into the hard, rigorous programs. That neuromuscular piece, it's sort of like, if we just get the muscles built up around endurance, and they can handle long runs, they can handle weekday runs, they handle back-to-back days really well. Well, then when it comes time to do, like, speed work and hard work and go after faster paces and recruit fast-twitch fibers, we don't have to worry about ripping something and restraining something, et cetera. And so it's like all the little systems that we break apart and talk about at some point in the book, they're all getting activated and challenged on the most low level to begin with. And then you're building up this endurance so that you're ready for the fun stuff that I started with.

Yeah, it's a reason we call... The other name we use for base period is the priming phase. You're priming the systems for what's to come, which includes all the things you just referenced. And so, you know, how primed are you going to be? Because if you're not primed enough, then you might break. You know, the other thing I think about along those lines is... I think oftentimes we think about a training cycle in terms of the volume, the miles per week, like kind of the peak of a mountain, where you build, build, build, build, build, build, to a peak at some point. And I think most people said that's like three to five weeks out from race day, where they're hitting their peak mileage, right? And then they're tapering and then they're racing. And so you have this kind of long build to a peak mileage in people's heads. But really, what we like to see is a build to a peak and then a plateau where you can hold that peak for a long period of time while introducing the various elements of quality work so that you can then taper at the end appropriately. And so in our system, for those especially who have been in our system for a long time, the peak volume actually happens pretty early on in their cycle. And then they're holding that volume for a longer period of time while they're introducing the various layers periodized of quality. And so the bigger your base, the sooner you can get to that peak mileage, which then means, as you said, you can have more fun with the quality and go deeper and get more complicated and more nuanced in a way that's going to actually help you. But too far too many people are peaking right there, right before they taper. And while that can work, you can get to a race that way. It means that you're sub-optimizing your result for sure. And I think for those that are newer to running, it might look that way. But the more experience you get, the more you're stacking layers and consistency, the more you should see your peak volume hit early on. Either near the end of your base period or near the end of that second phase, which is the strength phase, but never during the race-specific phase. So get that volume up. That's one of the things that obviously we're doing during our base building period. But that allows you to have not only the most fun with the quality, but also the most impact from it. So I think that sets the context well. Now what we want to do is kind of talk about the details of base. And we start with chapter 10a. We start talking about the Maffetone method. There's this guy, Phil Maffetone, who basically developed a method for building base, kind of put some math to it, so to speak. And while the math isn't perfect, he gives you equations for looking at how your heart rate should be managed during effectively base training, and how you should be thinking about what that looks like in terms of consistency across your runs and so forth. So let's just talk about Maffetone. What does he say? And why is that helpful? Why does it give us a framework for this?

Yeah, I'm glad we included it in the book, because it is, for those that love data, and they need a more, like I'm always thinking about this, like, too much structure breeds rebellion, but not enough breeds insecurity. So it's on that second half of the equation of not enough structure can breed insecurity. It's like, we would really like it if people would take our advice and say, when we say, like, I want you to see if you can sing a song, or if you can talk, and what does it actually feel like? Pay attention. But people who are like, I've been trying to pay attention, I don't know what I'm supposed to feel. I'm like, OK, I'll meet you there. Maffetone does have a method where it is structured, and we just don't want to overstate it, because it's not like the end all be all, and we want everyone to just go after this one way of approaching it. But he does put some strict math on it, and people love math, people that need to cling to some kind of structure. And we all have a little bit of that in us, so I'm not putting that down. But Maffetone just simply explains, take your heart rate at 180, and then subtract your age. And when you subtract your age, whatever that number is, you want your heart rate when running to be below that. So, well, and you can run right at it. That is, quote, still in the window, but I still don't want people to gamify. It's like, that's the peak of the heart rate that you should be running 180 minus your age in the spirit of building up a base so that you can let all those other little areas of the body that we were talking about properly develop. That's the core of it.

And yeah, so just to give you an example, I'm 46 years old. The Maffetone equation would say 180 minus my age, 134 equals the max heart rate I should be running. In order to essentially to use common vernacular, stay within zone two or easier, which is a base building aerobic capacity building zone. Now Maffetone, if you get into the depths of his book, has some pluses and minuses off of that equation that he'll say, well, if you're experienced and you've got a lot of aerobic foundation from prior programs or training blocks, then you can add a couple beats per minute to that. So he has a little bit of nuance in terms of his formula about ways you can add and subtract depending on your specific circumstances. But he sets that as a rule, and he'll have people religiously stay at or below that number regardless of the conditions, regardless of what terrain you're on. So if you're on a hill and your heart rate spikes, well, you gotta start walking to get it back under. And so he's very rigorous about how he has people manage around that heart rate, which I appreciate, because it is really the way we should practically think about it. Now, I think there's some elements of that that can be annoying for people. But if you're tried and true and really sticking to his protocol, it's gonna benefit you more than it's gonna hurt you. And so it's a good way of, as you said, giving people the math to say, all right, this is my line, and I'm not gonna cross it. Now, obviously, when we're doing that, we need to be using an appropriately managed heart rate data point by having a chest strap versus just wrist-based heart rate. And I think there's nothing wrong with wrist-based heart rate. It's directionally correct, as we used to say in consulting, but it's not an absolute correct. So you want a chest strap and to have your heart rate properly measured and monitored if you're going to use Maffetone's method. The other thing I will say about him is that as a slight digression, I think he has some other really interesting stuff when you dig into some of his work. Maffetone also was a musician, so he has some fun music if you want to go down a internet rabbit hole. But one of the things he talks about in his book too, that again, this is a bit of a digression that I really appreciate, is the fact that he talks about warm ups and cool downs as well. And so what he wants to see with a proper warm up and a proper cool down, is essentially that your heart rate follows a line that allows it to, in an independent way, hit each heart rate kind of range on the path to your maffetone number. So if I'm starting at my usual resting heart rates in the low 50s, 53, and I'm going to 134, then I should be warming up in such a way that my heart rate kind of goes through each of the ranges along the way. So it goes into the upper 150s, then lower 160s, sorry, upper 50s, then 60, then 65, then 70, right? Kind of in a not perfectly linear way, but a more linear way. Versus a lot of us, we start running, and it's like, boop, we go straight there, because we're going hard out of the gate. So it kind of reinforces what many would describe as the Kenyan method of really starting really slow in your warm up so that you can work up to where you want to be. And in his book, he talks about, you need to do that on the front end and then do the same thing on the back end, because it allows an appropriate start to the engine and then appropriate cool down of the engine so that you can get the most out of the engine, both during and after, and then on your next session. So that's a little aside, but I think one thing that I appreciate about him is he reinforces that need for appropriately gradual warm up and appropriately gradual cool down, because it allows your heart to essentially hit all of the zones as it gets to that peak, so that it's appropriate appropriately met, you know, started, right? You started the engine appropriately and didn't just gun it off the line. So anyway, but going back, so that 134 for me, as an example, would then be my limit. And so during the base period, I would try to stay there or below it, which reinforces what we would say also during the base period is that you want to stay at a conversational pace, a pace where you can sing lyrics comfortably from your favorite song, because we have to be in those easy aerobic development zones in order to get the benefits of the base. Now, we'll talk later about the speed that might be involved in the priming phase, but if you're not managing your heart rate and your effort during the base phase, then you are literally wasting your time in that phase. And that can be hard for people to stomach, especially when they're a little bit out of shape, or maybe they haven't been as consistent in between cycles, because it's going to be really hard to keep that heart rate in zone when they haven't been maintaining that consistency throughout. And it's going to be frustrating, because they're going to feel really slow, and they're going to have to stay really slow in order to keep the heart rate in the right zone. And they're not going to want to necessarily do that, but they should.

I was just thinking like, I think it's hardest even for... Like, if you're brand new, you might almost take it, because it's almost like, oh, sweet, like, I'm empowered. Like, I can do that. You know, I can handle, like, 20, 30 minutes or 30 to 50 minutes at, you know, that very gentle effort. I think it's toughest for experienced folks or people who came up in the hard knock days of coaches just grinding them into the ground, and then all of a sudden, they know certain numbers that they're used to seeing. And then they're like, I want to get better because I'm plateauing or coming back from an injury, et cetera. It's really tough for those folks because you gotta let go of ego. I think the number one blocker probably.

You gotta let go because it will get you to a higher place down the road, but it can be very hard to be patient. The other part of that ego equation I hear people talk about, they say, well, I don't want to walk. You know, I don't want to walk. Walking is not running, so that's somehow bad. But I always say there's no style points. If you need to walk, walk. It's hot. If you find a hill in the middle of the run that causes your heart rate to spike, walk the dang hill. It's about covering the distance and doing it in an aerobic way. It isn't about how fast you're moving your feet underneath you. There's nothing important about that part. It's just making sure your heart rate and your effort level is appropriate.

Yeah. Can I share an anecdote here?

Sure.

I think this is cool, because I just interviewed a woman this morning at about two hours ago in one of our virtual groups. And it's interesting because we didn't get to come at it this way. Like I think right now people might be listening and thinking, I've got a certain habit and a routine, and I'm employing it. And then you guys are throwing out this concept and you want me to change. That's a hard way to come at it, right? Because it takes a ton of trust. And that person has to be very trusting. I've been coaching a woman for a few years who was with us in Austin, moved off to Oklahoma as her husband's going to grad school. And as she was leaving Austin, she was nursing a stress fracture. And so because of the stress fracture, as we started to rebuild, she had no choice but to do walk-run intervals. And when she came back and ran her first half marathon, she had a 13-minute PR. And so the success was not only so grand that it overwhelmed her and inspired her. And she literally has zero ego now about walking. She's like, I had long told her, you don't have to take walk-breaks anymore. And she was like, on certain days, I just kind of like that routine and setup, right? And we were debriefing her training block because she's going into Eugene. She's peaking right now, about to taper and go into Eugene. And she was like, Coach, my heart rate, you know, I talk on the phone with my sister when I'm out on long runs now, and I've noticed my heart rate, and she's younger than 30. So her heart rate is 110 to 120. She has permission. If she was 30, she has permission to run all the way up to 150. But she's embraced it to such a tee, and is so over the idea of what people think about walk breaks, is that even at 110 to 120 beats per minute, she's now averaging about 915 pace, and her marathon goal pace is 8 minute. And so she was almost like, that pace is creeping up. Am I going too fast? Am I doing anything wrong? Like, I want to do this right. And I was like, I think you're learning to trust that when you employ it like this for so long, you start getting the benefits of it, you're almost wondering if you're doing something wrong. That's how much people increase when they embrace this.

When they're willing to go into what we would call zone zero in that situation. And you can get there walking, to be honest. And I wish more people would embrace that. You know, Alan Cousins, who I've talked about on the podcast, endurance, primarily triathlon, but he does all endurance athletes, coach in Colorado, who coaches elite level triathletes. And he'll build into their routine walking. Just like that's a part of it. To get additional volume without the impact on the body, there's walking in the program. And I wish more people would embrace that. But somehow we have this idea that's lesser or doesn't help us. In fact, even I recently saw some internet Instagram coach talk about, can you, she was answering the question, can you run too slow? And she said, yes, you can run too slow. If you're running where your heart rate's 116 or something, that's too slow. I'm like, no, actually it's not. I would love it if people were willing to actually hang out there. Because if they were, then it's just mind blowing the impact on what you can do at the higher heart rates when you're willing to spend time at those lower heart rates and do it in a way that is patient enough to actually stay there. So I mean, I could go on and on about that. I mean, I've lived it myself. And, you know, but I get it. So it's just hard to wrap your head around it. And so people want to want to go faster because that looks better on Strava.

Yeah. And now I'm thinking about that coach. I don't know who she is and don't know her experience level. But I instantly thought of the Dunning. I think it's the Dunning-Kruger effect. When you first learn something, you think you know way more than you actually do. And so you'll get a lot of voices out there that people are like, wow, I learned three things. And so they get so bullish and confident, and they're like, let me explain it to people. And then actually on the other side, which I've actually experienced so much, that sounds really egotistical. And I don't mean it that way. But you can study something so long and so deeply that you actually start to think, I don't know anything at all. I've spent more time in that bucket because I can absorb books. And I like reading and learning. But yeah, that's what's clogging up the internet. Sorry, I'm going on a change.

Look, no style points. You know, if you're on a long run, or any run for that matter, and you hit a hill and you're like, oh, this seems just harder than it should be, walk the dang hill. It's fine. Especially in the base phase, you know? And as you're going through, if you're doing hill repeats, don't walk the hill. Like that's the difference.

Yeah, we're not talking about quality workouts.

That's obviously in a later period of the build. But anyway, but walking, going super easy, staying in those lower heart rates to the point where you feel like you're going embarrassingly slow. That is where the magic is, and that's where you should be hanging out, for the most part, in the base period. Now, some people might say, well, why don't you guys just religiously follow Maphatone? And you kind of alluded to this earlier. And, you know, there's a few reasons for that. One of them, for me, is that not everybody wants to wear a chest strap and have that kind of attention to their heart rate. And again, if you're not using a chest strap, then you really shouldn't be looking at real-time heart rate data on your runs and doing anything other than just making a mental note. Because you need that accurate heart rate to really do, especially any real-time adjustment, and the risk just isn't accurate enough. So that's part of it, is I don't want everybody to have to feel like they need to get a special heart rate monitor. The other part of it is, you know, we believe that, as we've talked about, training people to run by effort and feel is as important a part of the overall equation as anything else. And so, do I want people sitting there looking at their heart rate on, you know, their appropriately managed heart rate monitor? No. I want them to actually learn what the underlying feeling is, to be going easy enough to be getting the appropriate benefits of base building. That, to me, is more important than having a specific method. So, again, appreciate where he's coming from. I aren't throwing the baby out with the bathwater here. We're just saying that this is a method for some people to use if they struggle with the ego behind managing your efforts appropriately. We would love for people, especially if they're not sure about this kind of approach, to start there, like test it out with an appropriately calibrated method like his. And then you can, on the other end, say, did it work for me? Because he has also very rigorous testing protocols where he'll have you run at your mafetone heart rate for a certain time. And you do that as a baseline test, and then you'll do it later and see that I can actually run further at the same heart rate. And so you actually can see through his method some very tangible benefits to it. And so it's a good entry point for those that are struggling with the ego side or even the intellectual side of what we're talking about. But while you're doing it, if you do it that way, I still want you to be in touch with the effort underneath it so that you can then replicate that, regardless of whether you have a chest strap on.

Yeah.

And again, we want you to kind of understand the underlying effort for it all anyway. And then, of course, outside of his specific method, there are other parts of the base building realm that we think are important. So if you're following his method, you're kind of looking at a sliver of the full protocol associated with base building. And so we'll talk about all the different parts as we dig into it now. But did I miss anything on Maphatone?

No, because I was just thinking, yeah, you're leaving something on the table, which we're about to go into. Those words were coming to mind. And I was also thinking like, another reason why we don't do it, over-preach it or overstate it is simply because the other half of that higher level thought I brought up earlier, and that's too much structure breeds rebellion. It's a kill joy. And we don't want to kill the joy. There's other things we can still do, but I hope the right spirit's coming off right now. It's like, I am actually thankful that he's codified it and provided the data because that is structure that people can wrap themselves around if they feel lost, confused, or struggling with the egotistical piece.

And the other, I guess, final point here is we also don't want to just get stuck there. I think I told you before we came on, I had an email from somebody about 18 months, I think, after I had done my original Maffetone episode. And this woman was so excited and was very eager to share that she had been doing Maffetone for 18 straight months, which, you know, and had specific goals that she wanted to talk about and, you know, I had to say, all right, it's time to move on from that. You've built a solid base. Now let's go into some of the other phases of the work and get to the nuance. So it's not the only thing either. And we don't want people to get stuck there because there are other phases that we'll talk about. But let's talk about the three kind of components of base building, what you should be thinking about. We talk about the running, strength and lifestyle. Those are kind of the three big parts of base building, at least the big buckets you should be thinking about. The running being perhaps the more obvious one. What are we doing with our running in the base period?

Growing volume incrementally and keeping it very smooth and easy.

Yep. And doing, as we'll talk about here in a little bit, a little bit of speed, a little bit of priming speed, starting with our favorite priming speed exercise, which is strides. So that'll happen in the base period. But as you said, we're kind of focused on... It's interesting. I actually saw somebody else post about the frequency volume intensity framework that they had independently developed. So we have a couple of FBI frameworks out there, and I was just happy to see someone else validating our thought process and how that sequence works. But in base building, with the running, you're focused on frequency and volume. Kind of the F and the V. The I we're saving for later phases. So you want frequency meaning you're establishing your routine, the days that you're going to run, and you're creating essentially labels for each one to say, all right, in a future world, this will be my speed day. In a future world, this is going to continue to be my long run day. In a future world, this will be my medium long run day. These will be my recovery days. So, routine, frequency first, and then once you've established that frequency, then you build volume on those days. And that's not to say that you need to get to your peak volume before the end of base, but we do like to see you get closer to it than most people might think, because we want you to have, again, that big foundation to get to a higher peak. So, you're building routine, you're building volume on those days, and then you're doing just a little bit of speed in the form of strides to start, and then as that becomes comfortable, you can introduce some other priming workouts. But those are all going to be done in a way that you're getting plenty of recovery between reps. They're not intended to be hard aerobic efforts. They're intended to be neuromuscular stimulus type efforts. So, those are the three things with running in the base phase, essentially. Frequency, volume, and tiny bit of intensity in the form of strides and priming workouts. So, that's all pretty straightforward. Now, when you're building volume, we'll remind you some of the rules of thumb there. Some people talk about the 10% rule. I typically like to translate that to absolute miles. So, you shouldn't be building by more than, call it two to four miles a week for most people from one week to the next in the base phase. Because if you build faster than that, then you'll typically get injured along the way because you're not loading the system appropriately. So, that's a good rule of thumb to use. And as you're doing that, usually what you'll find is your recovery days will get to their peak sooner than the other days. And you're primarily focused on building the length of your long run, the quality day run, and the medium long run during this base phase, once you've established some minimums around those, of all the days and including the recovery days. So, it's a pretty good overview there. I mean, we've talked about that, I feel like, a lot. So, I don't know how much more we need to linger on the running part, but is there anything else you would add?

No, I'll throw it to a question. Do you still take down weeks in the base building?

Ooh, good question. And I think, to me, the answer to this is it depends. It depends.

Good answer, like a good consultant.

Because I think, for an experienced runner who has history at whatever mileage level they're building to, and has done that a bunch of different times, I would put myself in that category. Experienced runner who's gotten to 80-plus mile weeks consistently, I can typically build linearly without taking down weeks during the base period, especially if I'm starting at a lower volume. Now, that being said, even though that might be the plan I write, I'm still going to listen to my body along the way, and be like, hey, how are we feeling from week to week? Maybe I don't feel as good one week, and I say, all right, I'm going to hold for a week, or maybe take a slight down week, if the body tells me to along that way. And that might go against what I've written in the plan. And so even for me, as someone who has experience and who could theoretically build linearly, I'm still going to have to pay attention to what happens along the way and adjust accordingly. Now, for somebody that's less experienced or new, then more than likely, you're going to need at least some hold weeks along the way, and maybe even some down weeks. But that would be where you build for two weeks, then you hold for a week, build for two weeks, hold for a week, build for two weeks, hold for a week, and see how that goes. And you might along the way say, hey, I need actually a down week in one of those hold weeks instead. And so it becomes a process by which you write a plan, but then you have to very much listen to your body along the way and adjust accordingly. But if you manage it appropriately and you're keeping your energy and effort levels appropriate, meaning super easy and conversational, then you should be able to do it in that fashion. And if you're struggling with it, then it might be a sign that you're running those base miles too fast. Yeah.

I was going to say not just your experience in the way of like having run plenty of races, but your experience and maturity within the sport of being able to pay attention and adhere to the, the take it easy and don't push it too much. It's always how we do it that complicates it.

Yeah. And it's interesting because I'm actually in a base period right now. You know, I just raced a couple weeks ago, took two weeks appropriately, you know, pretty chill, didn't run very much. And this is my first kind of official week back. What is my goal for this week? I don't have a mileage goal at all. My goal is to reestablish the routine and not full routine. I'm not doing six days a week, which would be normally what I would do. I'm going to my target is five days this week. Five days of whatever distance I feel comfortable doing is the plan for me. Next week, it will be six days at whatever distance I feel comfortable doing. And if all that goes well, then I'll start to think about, how do I structure the exact milages? And so even me, I'm not immune to thinking about it this exact same way, but along the way, you have to really listen to what your body is telling you to. Your plan is only as good as the paper it's written on, and then you have to adjust as your body tells you to. But I do want to underscore that point, which is that if you're struggling to build your mileage during the base period, that might be because you're going too fast. So slow everything way the hell down. I got a comment on my Strava after a run I did on Sunday, where I averaged between 12 and 13-minute miles, you know, which is, what, six-minute miles slower than I ran a half in January.

It's almost doubling your pace.

Yeah. And the person said that they appreciated seeing that because they perceived themselves as slower than me, and they're like, wow, you really make me feel good about going as slow as I need to by walking the walk. So I appreciated that.

Yeah.

Shout out. But yeah, you just, the pace doesn't matter. Like, it shouldn't matter at all. It shouldn't even register in your brain in this phase. It's, did I run the appropriate effort? I could care less what the pace is.

Yeah. You know, what's interesting is we didn't cover this in when we covered math. It is in the book, but that just dawned on me too. This, like base phases are a good time to focus on duration as opposed to mileage. Like, looking at the number of hours spent running per week. Because, like, to your point, it's not that you crossed a mile in 13 minutes. It's that you had X amount of time on your feet in the right zone that's producing all of that benefit and change.

Yep. It's a great point. Yeah. Using duration. Sometimes that also takes the pressure off the pace. You're like, well, I don't, you know, I'm just going to go run for 40 minutes and it's going to be what it's going to be. So that's a good tip if you're struggling with, well, I need to run five miles, but I have to run at a certain pace in order to get done in time so that I can then go to work or go take my kid to school or whatever it is. It's like, no, ignore all of that. Just go out and do 40 minutes in whatever pace is appropriate or feels right. So anyway, so all of that gets to the running aspect of this kind of three-part framework for what is bass. In this, I also want to just spend a brief moment talking about the duration of your bass period. Like, how long should your bass period last? And this is one area where I think the answer, just like the last question, was it depends. It depends. Where are you in your training? And also, how patient are you willing to be in order to get to a higher peak? I think too often the bass period is determined by the race date. It's like, oh, well, here's the race date, so I'm gonna back up, I'm gonna do this and that, and that means I can only do a three-week bass period. It's like, well, no. Maybe we should have planned differently. And maybe instead of squeezing the bass period down, we should be expanding the bass period and shortening other phases, because I would rather somebody who had less time to a target race spend more time in the bass than spend more time in other phases. I think you're gonna get more bang for your buck that way.

Yeah.

But anyway, but what does that look like? Typically, if we were to break down a 20-week program, we'll call it 22 weeks for a marathon, and you got a three-week taper, so that leaves 19 weeks. Usually our race-specific phase is about six weeks, so that leaves 13. Strength phase would be like seven-ish weeks, maybe eight, but that leaves another six. So you're like six weeks for a base period is I think the appropriate length for somebody who's starting a program coming off of maybe a short down cycle after doing another race, meaning they've been training consistently through. And while they may not be at peak volume starting their base, maybe they're not that far from it, and they can in six weeks really establish an appropriate base. I think if you're newer to running, or if you haven't had that consistency between cycles, then you need to extend your base period so that you can actually get to an appropriate volume level. And what that is is going to depend on where your starting point. But I would love for people to spend eight weeks, ten weeks, twelve weeks, maybe even five months in a base period. I don't necessarily think you need longer than five or six months if you're establishing a foundation for the first time, or if you're rebuilding. But more people could benefit from that length of time in base than I think people understand. We used to have a dedicated virtual group that was just for base building, that would allow people to say, hey, I'm going to pause on training for something, and I'm going to spend five months, six months in a base period. Now, that group, we don't coach anymore because it was hard to keep a critical mass, because it was by definition a one trick pony, meaning you get people in and then they leave, because you want them to get on to the next thing. And so it ended up just not having enough continuity because people were leaving as soon as they came. But I think it was a great program, and I wish more people spent that kind of time on base. So I had to pause there for a second and just talk about base duration.

Well, that's where I'll use the analogy that I almost went into at the introduction. And that's like, I'm thinking of a savings account. I'm a big Dave Ramsey fan. So it's like, he's always talking about having, you know, like your three to six month nest egg for your emergency fund. And it's interesting as that continues to grow, it's very easy to be tempted to be like, I could spend it on this, I could spend it on that, I could spend it on this, I could spend it on that. And people get it when you talk about money. They're like, oh yeah, it makes sense. I should save more. And if you spent more time just saving and not spending, you're still going to be happier a month later. You're like, oops, I just ended up having more money. You know, I guess where I'm going with it is it will not hurt you to camp out here for a while.

More miles in the bank never hurt. So give yourself more time than you think. And I know it can be boring, in air quotes, but I don't think it has to be, especially if you're willing to find a friend or a group of friends to do it with, you're mixing up your routes, if you're having, you know, finding other ways to add variety to it. So, but just think about that. The duration of your race is important. So that's the running side. Two other parts, strength being the second one. Here we're talking about muscular strength. So actually integrating the lifting program into your routine, if you haven't already, or restarting it, if you've taken a break, or starting to ramp it up again, if needed, post-cycle. And, you know, just like aerobic training, strength training should be phased as well. You know, if I think about my journey, just came off of this race where I was tapering my strength training, and I do it twice a week, religiously. I was tapering my strength training, and then had a break because I was recovering from the race, and now I'm starting again. This is week one back to strength training, as well as week one back to running. And what does that look like? It looks like reestablishing the routine on basic movements. I don't jump in and go 90% of max, you know, three reps or five reps or whatever. I go 70% of max and five reps, you know, to a point where I feel like, all right, this is easy. I can do this, no problem. So that I'm not ridiculously sore the next day, so that all of this stuff starts to integrate in a way that's sustainable. And so with strength during the base period, that's also what you're trying to do. Establish the routine with it and build competence with it. So kind of the frequency-volume equivalent to the running, but translated to the strength side, which looks like re-establishing your movement, starting with weights that are manageable, not doing anything that's going to make you sore, getting the routine in, and if you're doing it twice a week, make sure that's a part of it. And so that's a part of your base building. Too many people, in my opinion, add strength in the wrong place. They're like, oh, I got to race in 10 weeks. I need to add strength, so I'm ready for it. No, actually, if you're at that point in your training, don't. Don't. You got to dial in to what you're already doing, right? Dial in to the running if that's what you're already doing. Add strength in base periods. Don't add it anywhere else.

Yeah, it makes me think of like, see it as like how they're all connected. It's like you do the strength so you can handle the volume. You do the volume so you can handle the speed. And then you taper so that the strength, volume, and speed all come together on race day and you perform, right? So I'm actually actively working with someone who's peaking for a late April race. And we just had this conversation. It was like, let's taper out this strength because she's got a great strength coach that she's working with. And they wanted to add progression overload. It was like, through that lens where he's taking her, it would make sense. I was sort of like, oh, I could empathize here. He's just looking at the program that he's writing. And so I went way out of my way to simply say like, hey, explain what's going on. Like we're about to put you through the worst two weeks of your entire training block. We don't want to add new plyo exercises that, you know, nothing that other coach said was false, untrue, or even incorrect in any kind of way. It's just without the knowledge of what I'm doing over here, the combination of the two of us will break you. Right. So yeah, you got to, you taper it out. It becomes less significant the closer you get to the race and increasingly significant in your base period where the mileage is slowly creeping up. Yeah.

And it's where you're establishing that routine again, reintegrating your movement patterns, starting at a strength or a weight level that's manageable, but gradually increasing it to your kind of normal weights. And so all of that happens in base. So just like you're building and running, you're building the strength in parallel so that when you get to the next phase, then you can periodize them in sequence together versus adding strength in later or doing it out of sequence. So this is the time, if you don't already have strength integrated, to find the time for it. And if you miss this window for whatever reason, and that's okay, then don't add it later. So then what does strength look like? We've talked about this before, but we'll remind you, we typically recommend at least two days a week of strength done consistently. We like to do it in kind of two different frequencies with two different kind of rule thought processes. One is ideal. If you can match your medium long run day and your quality day with your strength, so that you do strength later on that day, either right after those runs or later in the day on those days, then that is optimal, because then you can keep your hard days hard, your easy days easy, so you're not doing strength on a recovery day, for example. So that's optimal. But a lot of people can't do optimal, because that means a lot of time on those two particular days, the medium long run and the quality day. So then the secondary rule, which honestly works for a lot of my people, is find two other days that you can do consistently, and then stick with it. Because once you establish that routine, the body will adapt and you'll be okay. Now, there's fine print with that second rule, which is that if you're doing a strength on Friday, and you have long runs Saturday, and you're in a marathon block, when you get to the 20-mile runs, I don't want you to do heavy squats on Friday before you're 20-mile longer the next day. So, you have to maybe modify the content based on when you're structuring your strength training. But that's the secondary rule. Find two other days that work consistently and just repeat it, because the body will adapt, especially if you're managing the strength the right way. And in the right way, we mean so that it is supplemental to your running. The strength coach that you were referencing for your athlete, he's looking at that silo, the strength silo. How can we optimize this silo of the work? When really, you're looking at the big picture and saying, all right, no, the important thing is over here, the running part, this should support and add to the running part, but it shouldn't take away. And so when you integrate the two, which wins? The running wins, especially at peak, in the peaking phase of a training block when you're gearing up for an April race. So those two things should dance a happy dance together. And if in doubt, which takes priority at any point or where you should be more conservative, it's always, always on the strength side if running is your primary focus and goal. So there you go. Strength is the second thing to establish. Third thing to establish in base building is lifestyle. The other supporting elements to make it all work together. And one thing I appreciated about Alan Cousins, again, the coach in Colorado that I've referenced, great follow on X if you're on X as well, really informative guy is he talks about how people under-appreciate the impact of lifestyle and stress on their ability to get the most out of their training. When people are stressed or have too much going on in their lives, it's really hard to get your peak performances at the end of a training block, harder than you may even realize. And again, I think part of that's because our body is masterful at adapting to stress and load and normalizing it. So you think that, oh, it's no big deal, I can just gut it all out. But setting up your lifestyle in a way, not that it's perfect or that you have the space and freedom of a pro athlete, but that you can prioritize the things you need to prioritize so that it all fits together in a way that's sustainable is critical. And sometimes it's an afterthought. We think, well, I'm just going to squeeze it all in. Well, maybe not. And this is also where you have to have those conversations about seasons of life. And sometimes there's just seasons of life where you're not going to be able to squeeze it all in. And sometimes life is going to win. I've talked about it before, but when we've had our first kid, I didn't run for nine months. Why? Not because I was lazy or didn't care about running anymore. It's because I was figuring out life with a newborn child. And that appropriately took precedent. And so in that season of my life, I was not focused on running performance. And then I got back to it after nine months and would go on to chase performances again. And there's been various periods of my life that have been like that. And we all have those windows. So that's okay. If you're in that window. But if you're not, and you're thinking about how it all fits together, just think about the sum total of load. The running, the strength, the life load. And how can you, to the extent that you have flexibility, pull lifestyle things away so that you can put more energy into performance?

Yep.

What do you think about in those categories of like buckets? Like it's work, it's sleep, it's... What do you think about?

I think of the word take inventory first. So you have to know yourself, and you have to kind of scan and say, what's going on? It helped me early in my coaching phase is the timeline, but it wasn't even a conversation about coaching. I remember someone saying that the mind doesn't register physical stress versus like lifestyle stress or versus just like anxious thoughts about the beginning or end of the universe. Like it doesn't experience stress, any of those stresses differently. And then when we think we've talked about this in prior podcasts, but it's like we have multiple systems, right? One of which is the endocrine system. So like when you're waking up and you're like in a state of stress and your cortisol level, so your hormones are like off, it's like you're like, OK, man, you got to take some inventory and figure out what is the culprit. Sleep is the number one thing I think of, but like we covered quite a lot in the book. Like is it diet? Is it some thing in your life that you have no control over? Like the example you gave, like where y'all are having a kid, that's you're in the response mode to the kid. Like you don't get to dictate the schedule. If they decide to wake up at 3:30 a.m., you're awake at 3:30 a.m. And so then boom, sleep is jeopardized. So I don't know why I got so passionate there, but what I really just wanted to say is like, start with taking inventory of like, what's getting in the way for you? What's your limiter? What's your blocker? And then some very specific categories that you could review are like, how's your sleep going? How's your work life? How are your relationships? Did I mention dietary intake? Or yeah, like what are you eating and consuming? And is that supporting you? Are you under fueled? Like I just think that people should review these different categories and then try not to fix everything at once. It's just make a healthy next step of like, okay, I think this is the biggest culprit here, and sleep keeps coming to mind. But it's like, find the one that you feel like you could improve and would improve, and then make a goal in your next block or base building phase to adjust it, go on the offense with it.

Yeah, and when in doubt, say no more. Take things off your plate. Couple of tangible tips I would also add here. One is communicate. If you have family, if you have a life partner, whoever's helping you navigate this world, communicating with them, and making sure that whatever you're about to do, they understand, I think is also really important. Because ultimately, you're only as strong as your support network, and you gotta have people around you that are gonna support what you're doing. And there may be windows of time where you say, hey, this is an important window for me, and we need to, to the extent that we can, prioritize that. And then there will be other windows where you're gonna prioritize that other person's thing or goal. And so sometimes you have to make those trade-offs. You know, I know parents that are in the Rogue universe, and they trade off seasons where each of them gets to have the big race, you know, so that they can appropriately balance kids and family and things at home. And so those are conversations you need to have. And to the extent that they understand why you want what you want, and they understand how it all is gonna work, and how you're training to get there, so that they know how to support you in that goal, and recognize, too, that at some point you'll reciprocate and support them in their goals. It's all a part of it. The other thing I would mention here is, I think this bucket is also about understanding your what I call pressure release valves. Knowing what are the triggers for stress for you, and if those get triggered, then what are you triggering in terms of pulling pressure out of the system by managing your training differently? Because you can only do as much as you can recover from the work. And so you also have to be able to understand in the space period, you know, what are the levers I can pull when work gets out of control? When my kid obligations are greater than I thought? When I can't sleep for whatever reason? What am I going to do? And how are those sequenced so that I can still get done the most important things? And so I think for everybody, those pressure release valves might look a little bit different, depending on what their training looks like, what they're training for, what their strengths are, et cetera. But I often have those conversations with athletes and say, okay, your first pressure release valve is running even easier on your easy days. Your second one might be pulling back on quality and not doing quality in a week, and replacing that with strides. You know, another one might be pulling back on medium long run distance, then long run distance. And so, you know, you can kind of sequence those things and say, all right, when things hit the fan, what are the levers I'm going to pull to take stress out of the training side, so that I can balance with increased stress from the lifestyle side. And having your ability early on in a cycle to identify what those pressure release valves are, and then actively manage them throughout, is an important part of the process, from my perspective.

Yeah.

So there you go. So think about lifestyle, and the lifestyle bucket is sleep. We've talked about it already, but let's hit on it again. I mean, it's the number one recovery tool, you know. We always talk about three recovery tools. There's sleep, there's fueling, and then there's fueling, including hydration, and then there's easy movement. So, but sleep, you know, if you sleep out of whack, it's hard to get it all right. And this isn't a sleep podcast, but what are your top sleep recommendations? You said you've worked on it recently, personally. So, what's been working for you?

Well, the number one thing I did with myself was like, I'm going to stop being on defense, and I'm going to go on offense. And that was meaning specifically defense being like, oh, I think I'm going to just cancel my Netflix. And I did a few times. I've like started, I'm sure a lot of people do, but I've started and stopped my Netflix multiple times because I was like, I always click play on the next episode, and I don't trust myself. So, James, you're in time out, you know? But I started hitting, and I also have tried other things where it was like, I'll just set the same alarm every single morning, and eventually I'll be so exhausted. And I was like, all right, no. So I ordered a diffuser and I put lavender in it, and I click it like three hours before. I bought sleepy time tea that I start taking like 90 minutes before. I moved up dinner time so that I could eat and then brush my teeth, and I put my mouth guard in, even though I know I still have like two hours left in the day, and I might read or work on some stuff on work or whatever. There are tips, get off screens, but that's just the nature of this life. I still sometimes am on screens and get away with it. But where I'm going was like, I was like, okay, I want to go on offense in regard to the wind down process. Like how do I come out of this? So yeah, getting the TV off, even if like, you know, I might have to check an email, you know, because I was waiting for something from someone, whatever. But yeah, one, being on offense about it, I listed a lot of little things, and then two, you have to be intentional. I would say for about a month of trying to be as routine driven as you can, because then if you break routines, and I deal with it every single Wednesday night, actually, it's a pattern interruption for me every single week, and I just try to like accept that as a norm, and then keep my mind thinking Thursday, Friday, Saturday, Sunday, sort of like, I'm going to stick to this routine, because you're going to get the best results if you start communicating to your body that this is when we shut down. That's the whole point of putting in the foot spacer when I do, the mouth guard when I do. It's sort of like signaling to the body. Then all I've got is just sipping that sleepy time tea. And yeah, about 90 minutes later, I'm like, oh man, I can't do anything but crawl in that bed.

The sleepy time tea is probably a placebo too, right? It's probably not even, I mean, who knows, right? Like, is it helping you go to sleep, or is it just a part of the routine that's signaling something in your brain that's like, all right, it's time. And which actually brings me to a hot take. Hot take, I wish we had like a button to push. You know, everybody's talking about morning routines and how important that is and all that. I don't buy that personally at all. Like, I don't have a morning routine really. But I think evening routines are actually where it's at. Maybe even more, or I would say, it's more important than morning routine. Because having that evening routine that signals to the body, okay, it's time to wind down and go to sleep. And when I was training for this race, I'm a night owl, right? I generally am most alert, awake, functioning, in terms of how my brain works, at like 10 to 11, 30 p.m. And that'll slide later if I'm able to sleep later. That's just the way I've always been wired. In college, I don't think I went to sleep most nights until two or three in the morning, and that's just the way it was. But then I would sleep till 10, you know? But anyway, where I was going with that is that when I was training for MOAB, I actually implemented some of those routine things you're talking about to signal to my body, all right, it's time to go to bed early. And I found myself, and to the surprise of my wife, who's used to me being the last one awake, and she's always asleep before me, to be like, wait, you're going to bed already? It's like 9.30, and I'm like, yeah, I'm tired. And I would just roll over and fall asleep, and she'd still be watching TV. And so if I can do it, the king of night owls, then yeah, I think that routine, in addition to, of course, for me, not having any ambient light in the room is key. Sound, obviously, temperature, getting the temperature cold enough so that your body's ready from a temperature regulation point to go to sleep. So there's other elements, but all of those are well publicized. But I think the sleep routine, the bedtime routine, just like with kids, I mean, we start when they're young, right? They tell you, establish a routine with your kid where you do whatever routine and you read them a book and then they go to sleep. And when you get out of that routine, it's chaos. Give yourself your own bedtime routine. All right, we've touched on that. One last question I want to get to as we kind of wrap this up, Running Strength Lifestyle. Going back to the running for a second, just to put a bow on that, because this is a running podcast, is how do we tell people how long is too long or how many miles they need to be getting to in their base period? And we talked about a rule of thumb for building the miles, but how do they determine what mileage to get to before they transition to something else?

I think it's the classic, like we've said a couple of times today, it depends. You know, it's gonna vary from person to person. So you're someone who, I feel like in your training towards Moab, you just started inching up towards 60 and hummed there, right? But someone who's never run 40 mile weeks before, I'm not gonna encourage them to crawl towards 60, right? So I think you should consider where you've been at before. When it comes to long run, like I like people to do four runs a week as a floor. And then in my head, I like the 90-minute mark, which can vary when it comes to a long run. It can vary from person to person because of their pace. And so at the very least, I think of like a 90-minute long run, however long it takes you to build up to that. That's the point at which you start to deplete glycogen storage. And so I've always kind of bucketed that as the marker of like, it's not a long run until it's 90 minutes. But again, someone who's never run an hour, that could almost feel like the wrong message for them.

Yeah, a couple of notes, I guess I would say, if we're talking about rules of thumb, which again can always vary. One is that I don't like people to increase from one cycle to the next by more than about 20% from their prior peak. So if you get to 30 miles per week in one training cycle, then that would mean you've unlocked 36 miles per week that you can get to in your second or your next training cycle. So that you're not ever loading the overall system too much from one cycle to the next, in addition to of course building by two to four miles per week to get there. So that's a rule of thumb. Again, there's always reasons to break the rule of thumb, but that's one that I use on that. And then I would say from a, you know, how to get to that peak perspective, I would say in the base period, if you can get to 80% of that peak in the base period, and then from the 80% to the 100% in the strength phase, in terms of getting to that peak mileage, then I'm happy camper. Now, if you can do it sooner than that, great, but that's another rule of thumb that I would use in terms of how you're going to get there. So essentially, you know, if you're trying to build to 36, and you can get to, call it 29-30 in the base period, with the ability to go higher, you know, to get to the full peak, then great. Then you're doing good, doing good work. Because some of this comes down to the long run, and, you know, how long the long run is going to be. And if you're in a marathon cycle, you're not going to do 20-mile runs in the base period. So there's always going to be some climbing you're going to do after that base period in terms of miles per week. So those are some rules of thumb. But let's tie a bow on this one. We've already been going for an hour and 10 minutes. Final thoughts on base. If you wanted to leave one thought with the audience, what would it be?

You almost said these words and almost responded this way earlier. But it's like in the same way that in the one of the most recent podcasts, you said like one of the most important chapters was is your training polarized enough? I would say in your actual implementation of training, I think base building is one of the most important components that you should and could consider because of all the reasons we talked about today.

Yeah, and I would take that further and say for either category of runners, say the new runner or the experienced runner, contemplate, doesn't have to be this year, could be early next, contemplate a five to six month window where you just focus on base and building volume with easy miles and some strides. I think the magic that can unlock for then your next training cycle after that is significantly more than what any one individual training cycle can do for you. So just think about planning for that. It's just amazing what an appropriately patient and focused and length base building period can do for you. So the other nice thing about a base building period is that you don't have to taper from it. You don't have to recover from it. You can just roll right into the next thing.

Just show up ready.

So yeah, so it's the least disruptive of any of the training cycles that you can focus on. So there you go. Contemplate an extended base period. We'll leave you with that thought as we wrap this one. And as we do, a couple of reminders on ways that we can help you if you're interested. One is that if you want to get the copy of the book right here, you can do that by going to our Instagram, at Rogue Running. You can also find it on, I think, most book channels at this point, Amazon, et cetera, Barnes and Noble and all those places. If you want to train with us, go to roguerunning.com. We've got in-person groups in Austin and Dallas, Dallas area, Austin area, so multiple locations in each of those big cities here in Texas, and then three different levels of virtual group, pretty much for any level of experience. And of course, if you want to follow us along, you can check us out on Instagram, where every Friday, 2 p.m., either you or I or both of us are on there doing Q&A. So if you have questions for us specifically that might apply to your training, jump on with us Friday, 2 p.m. Central on our Instagram channel, and we'll answer your questions. So I think that covers how you can interact with us if you'd like to, or if you want to learn more with that, we'll wrap it. You guys have some good runs out there, and we'll talk to you next week.