Hey, everybody, welcome to episode 377 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung, coming to you on a Friday. Excited to be back with you this week. This week's topic, we're going to be talking about patience and how you can use patience as an asset to ultimately get your potential. So patience to drive potential, to tee up the topic, we're going to use an email that I got from listener, April, who was on the podcast at the end of last year. She was on one of my listener coaching episodes. And so we're going to get a little update from her progress. And she has a question that I think tees up this topic well. So April, you're going to get your answer from me. It comes in full podcast form. So that's what we're going to be talking about today. I'm going to give you six principles to make sure that you're being patient enough with your running journey in order to reach your max potential. Before we get there, a couple of notes and a PSA. First of all, I want to remind you, of course, that Rogue Running coaching is kicking off in full swing for fall races coming out from September to October and beyond. We'll be heading ourselves to the Columbus Marathon for our Rogue Destination Race of Choice. But you can really do any race. We've got a program for you, whether it's speed track, working on 5Ks and 10Ks or half track or full track, in person or virtual. We've got all the options, and you can check those out at our website, roguerunning.com, just to mention a few things specifically. We're kicking off our fall training at our in-person locations in the Dallas area and the Austin area this weekend, actually. And so you can jump in on that at any point, and we'll be ready to get you going for those fall cycles. And then for virtual, all of that kicks off at the beginning of June, whether you are looking to join our Rogue Rising Group, our Rogue Renegades Group, or our new advanced, what we're calling now Team Rogue Virtual with Coach Kathy. Those are all three options, and we can put you in a program depending on your experience level and your current volume. If you have any questions about any of that, you can email us coaching at roguerunning.com, and we'll get you pointed in the right direction. I also wanted to mention, just as I did last week, we're starting to do these Friday coach Q&A's with Coach James Dodds and I on our Instagram page at Rogue Running Friday at 2 p.m. Central. We're going to try to do these every week. If you jump on and you have questions, you can post those in the comments, and you'll get real-time answers from Coach James and I. So go check that out. I know today I did one earlier, and we had clearly some listeners jump on, and as that audience starts to grow. So check that out every week, or just pop in when you have a question, 2 p.m. Central on our Instagram page at Rogue Running. Look for us to be doing a Rogue Running virtual live coaching session every single week. So if you have questions, go see us there. So those are my announcements for today. And then I had a quick PSA before I jump into the email from April and the topic for today. The PSA is the fact that it's getting warm, folks. Here in May, in Texas, it feels in many ways like summer has come early. And I know that's true in a lot of places. We've had some warm races even in places as far as like Philadelphia. The Philadelphia Broad Street Run was a warm day. So we're experiencing that across the board, and it may not have come to you yet, but it is on its way. And it's time to prepare for summer training. And so there's a couple of notes I want to give you by way of reminder, so that you can prepare for summer training and make sure you're doing it in the right way. The first is that it takes a little bit of time to adapt. It's going to take four to perhaps six weeks for you to adapt to the warmer conditions. And so it's going to feel pretty miserable for these opening weeks of summer as your body's adapting. And while it may never feel amazing, it will get better as your body adapts to these conditions. And so be a little bit patient with yourself, especially over the next four to six weeks. You may not feel yourself. You may feel some lingering fatigue. You may feel sluggish on runs, things like that. All of that is normal, and you will adapt to the heat, and it will get better. It may never be perfect or amazing, but it will get better. So that's one thing to note. Second thing to note, as we actually got a topic on this or a question on this on our Q&A today, was what do we need to be thinking about from a pacing standpoint in the heat? And it's really, really important to make sure that you're adjusting your paces for the conditions that you're in. And so if you're here in a place like Texas, where it might be 70 plus degrees in the morning and 90 plus percent humidity, you need to be adjusting those paces for easy runs and for workouts by perhaps as much as 30 to 40 seconds per mile in order for the effort to match what would be a similar effort on a cool day. So you have to make those adjustments. If you don't make those adjustments, then you're going to end up in the wrong training zones. You're going to end up working too hard, and it's not going to pay off when the cooler, as much when the cooler temperatures return in the fall. And yes, there are challenges with that, where you have to train slower through the summer conditions in order to ultimately race faster when the good conditions return in perhaps October or November. And you have to kind of take a leap of faith that that's going to play out and work out. And trust, it does. We've had thousands of athletes go through our programming, make these adjustments, and come out and chase their more specific goals when the weather cools off again for these fall races. And so it takes a little bit of a leap of faith, but it's absolutely critical. If you're going to get the most out of yourself in a fall cycle or a fall training cycle, you have to adjust the paces for the heat. If you don't, you're going to bury yourself. You're going to end up over training, hurt, perhaps injured, not recovering properly. So make those adjustments. We will adjust those things out of hand at altitude, but for whatever reason, we don't give ourselves the same grace in warm and human conditions. Please give yourself that grace. Additionally, I would remind you that hydration in the summer months becomes a kind of a full-time job. We really got to stay on top of hydrating with electrolytes in order to make sure you're getting the H2O you need for respiration to be able to do the workouts that you're doing, but also to allow your body to rebuild itself and recover. And if you're not getting enough water with electrolytes, which allows you to absorb that water, then you're going to feel a general fatigue in malaise. It's going to crop up sometime in the middle of the summer when it just starts to all be too much. And you'd be surprised at how much difference it makes if you're on top of hydration, which means plenty of water every day and water with electrolytes throughout the day. So you're able to take in and absorb what you're drinking. Because if you don't get the electrolytes to go with it, then what will happen is you'll be one of those people who's drinking plenty of water and then going to the bathroom all the time and peeing out clear liquid. And what's happening in those situations quite often is you don't have the electrolytes you need to absorb the water you're taking in. So it goes to your cells, knocks on the door, can't get in, and then wraps right around to your kidneys and goes straight out. And that's not what we want. We want that water to be taken in and absorbed. Electrolytes facilitate that absorption, so make sure you're getting plenty of it. And it's just something you have to think about and supplement all the time. So have your electrolyte supplementation of choice, and just make sure you're establishing that routine and getting on it. Okay, that's the PSA for today. It's time to engage summer mode of training. Now let's get to our main topic. How do you use patience to reach your full potential? We'll tee this up with a question from listener April, who was on the show late last year. Here we go. April says, I just wanted to write to give you a quick update and to say thank you for all of your help. I was a podcast guest for episode 356 with my big goal to run a sub four marathon in the fall of 2025. You gave me graded guidance and helped me line up a way to set up a home base running routine that would give each day a purpose and help me build my mileage. I really loved the way you framed building mileage for a half marathon that would set me up for a marathon training cycle. I ran my half marathon on April 19th with an intimidating goal of 145. My training pointed to being able to accomplish that, but it felt like a huge leap from my previous best of 155. I'm thrilled to tell you that I finished in 143.13 on that day. I feel like I'm in a great place to go after this goal of sub four for the fall, but I almost feel like I'm in too good of a place, which I know is odd to say. When I plugged this half result into the Macmillan calculator, it spits out a marathon time of 337, which seems insane to me, especially with my only marathon finish time being a 446. Do I shoot for such a big leap in time, or should I be conservative to ensure that I finish under that four hour mark? It seems like one of my biggest struggles now is having my mental confidence catch up with the huge improvements that my physical fitness has made. I feel very strongly about wanting to finish this next marathon cycle strong, rather than falling apart at the end like last time. But so much time and energy goes into a marathon training block, that I worry that leaving a huge chunk of time on the table wouldn't be very satisfying. Anyway, I'm so grateful for your podcast and all the information that you put out. I'm still in a bit of disbelief for having such a great race, and I'm still riding the high of working hard for a goal and then executing it. Following your guidance has helped me have the best training and fitness of my life. What you're doing really makes such a big difference to so many people. Thank you, April. Well, April, good to hear from you. Thanks for the message. I really appreciate it. And it's so good hearing that things are going well and that you not only beat the goal that you'd set out for yourself, but you absolutely smashed it. And that's amazing. It feels great. And I will say that this whole episode is going to be an answer to your question. So I'm going to run through my thoughts on patience to ensure progress and reaching potential. I've got six of them. And then I'm going to come back around to some specifics that apply perhaps in your situation. But I wanted to first just congratulate you on an amazing race. Thanks for the update. I'm excited to see what's ahead. You clearly have a bright future in the sport if you keep doing the work. And you're going to be running much faster than a 337 if you want to be down the road. And so we're going to take a long term view on that. And I'll help you hopefully figure out how to think about it on an interim basis. So that tees it up. But April's message and a lot of conversations I've been having recently with athletes kind of fall in this camp of folks that are newer to the sport building and building quickly and dreaming big quickly, too. And so there's been a few conversations I've been having with various athletes in the Rogue fold where I'm having to in some ways get people to pump the brakes because running is a long-term game. Getting your most potential requires patience. And so you want to treat the process accordingly. And I think sometimes it's hard to figure out what exactly that means. So I'm going to give you six principles. They're probably more if you go back into the podcast archives on my show, but this will make it easily digestible. So six things to be thinking about to make sure you're being patient in your process. And then April, we'll come back around to some specifics for your question. But the first point is one that you've heard me make on this show many, many times, and I'll say it till I'm blue in the face, is that you have to, if you want to reach your highest potential, you have to take a long-term view of that. You have to take a long-term view of that. Now what does that mean? Because I think sometimes people, when I say long-term view, they think, oh, I'll think 12 months out. But no, I'm actually, I want you to think even further out. I want you to think 20 years out. And that's not to say that you really are gonna plan for 20 years at one time. You're not gonna sit down with a piece of paper and a pen and say, all right, well, here's what I'm gonna do in year one, year two, year three, all the way to 20 years. It's more of a metaphorical point I'm making. I essentially want you to think out beyond rational timelines for long term planning. I want you to think beyond those rational timelines where you might actually do some legitimate planning and maybe you can think four or five years out for that purpose. But for 20 years, you can't possibly think that far out and start to get too tactical about your planning. So it's really this idea. I want you to think beyond the point of you being able to get tactical with your planning and just realize that if you do things the right way, really regardless of when you started, you can continue to get faster for 20 years in this sport, really regardless of the age that you're starting, if, if, if you treat it with a long-term view. And that means that you recognize that, fortunately or unfortunately in our sport, aerobic development can continue for 10 to 15 years for people if they're continuing to lay down that base foundation and stay healthy along the way. And then even once you get to the end of sort of the aerobic capacity building side of the equation, there are other things to tweak and optimize in terms of other parts of your aerobic system, as well as of course your neuromuscular and your musculoskeletal system. So we can usually continue to squeeze out improvement even beyond 10 or 15 years because we can optimize around all the other small things that matter, the 1%, so to speak, and strength and all of those other components. And so quite often, we can see people continuing to improve for 15 years, 20 years. Now, that doesn't happen though if you burn out too fast, if you end up with injury after injury in a way that prevents your body from properly developing and perhaps develops long-term structural challenges that prevent you from reaching that full potential. We can't get there if you flame out, meaning you get hot and so excited and motivated that you do a bunch of things quickly, and then suddenly you can't sustain that motivation because you get burned out, you kind of burn hot and then flame out. So there's a lot of elements here. There's a physical side of long-term sustainability. There's the physical side of the ability to improve for the long term if you allow your body the time and space to do that. And then of course, there's the mental side of making sure you can sustain the work. It's not easy. The other side note here quickly is that I would say when I talk about 20 years of improvement and development, that would be including the years you're actually working on running and recognizing that there might be years in there where you have a break because you have a kid or you have a career change or you move or something pops up from a life stress standpoint, and you have to take a break from structured training, and maybe you spend two or three years in a window where you're not able to train consistently or as much. And maybe you're doing some things to maintain, but you're not really giving it that focus and rigor because life evolves in their seasons of life. And I consider that a break, so to speak, from the 20 years of development. So what I'm talking about when I'm talking about 20 years is the cumulative total of those years where you're really working on training in running specifically. And if you have little breaks in there, then that extends the time. So maybe you spend two years here taking a break for whatever reason, three years there taking a break. Then that means really you're going to continue to improve potentially 25 years. So we kind of take out those breaks when we're doing this math. And then of course, once you get beyond the improvement point, there's always ways you can continue to set goals and strive and chase things even as you age. So it's not like those 20 or 25 years marks the end of the journey. It just marks when perhaps the goals have to shift and change and evolve. But the point coming back remains the same, which is that you're thinking about this long term, which means that the decisions you make now in the near term, in the next month, six months, 12 months, don't really matter in the grand scheme of things. It's the cumulative set of decisions that start to matter over the 20 years. So one workout doesn't matter. One run doesn't matter. One race doesn't matter. What matters is, are you taking it all in, seeing the big picture, and collectively, with all the decisions you're making, making good choices that are going to give you that ability to continue to improve for those 20 years. And so to take it back to the context for you, April, and we'll come back to this on another one of my points, is that what you run in this next marathon, the specific time, from my perspective as a coach, doesn't actually matter. It doesn't matter in the grand scheme. If you're doing the work and you're doing the work consistently, you're going to PR, and that'll be amazing in something to celebrate. What matters more in this period of time leading up to that race is, are you continuing to build consistent volume in the ways that we talked about? And I think more important early in your marathon execution, are you able to execute a race where you're able to finish strong, negative split, feel good about it? Because I think how you run this next marathon is going to matter more than the total time you run. And while the decisions you make about time are important, and you should be specific about it, you should have a target and a plan because that's how we execute. Well, on race day, the exact target at this stage in the game doesn't matter as much. We will want you to do good work in training and then put together a what might be considered relatively conservative plan to chase a target time that will allow you to finish strong, feel good about it, and then have a big stepping stone that you can carry on to the next. And I don't say any of that to be dismissive about it because I understand the fears that you're talking about, the anxiety that you're talking about of, hey, can I make this step that the calculators tell me I can make? What I'm trying to do is give you some relief and say, hey, it doesn't matter as much as you think it does. It'll be a nice step forward. It's going to be amazing. It's going to be important. But what matters more than the exact time is, am I continuing to stack wins in training? Am I continuing to execute well on race day? Am I running the race in a way that allows me to finish strong and feel good about it? Am I taking a big step forward from that prior first marathon? All those things you're going to be able to do, and you're going to be able to do them within a pretty broad range of times and claim success in that broad range. And so I'm trying to essentially take the pressure off a little bit because I think sometimes people become too focused on that next interim goal versus staying connected to the big picture. And you're going to be improving for a long time, April, for as long as you want to take swings and work on this stuff consistently. And so what you do in this year, in this training cycle, at least from a specific time standpoint won't matter in the grant scheme because you're going to far exceed it if you keep doing the work like you're doing. So that's point number one. Take a long term view. You're in no hurry. There is no rush. You don't have to chase anything that the calculator says you have to chase. All right. So that's point one. Long term view. Point two. Stay processed focused. Stay processed focused. Yes, we should dream. Yes, we should think about big goals. Yes, we should put times associated with those goals. Yes, you should know ultimately what you want in the sport. And if time is a factor in that equation, then great, beautiful. Love that. It should be. But you have to pair that and perhaps prioritize ahead of that a process focus, a mentality that says, what's my home base routine? How am I executing on that? Am I able to level up that routine from cycle to cycle perhaps by gradually and incrementally increasing volume so that I can build a bigger aerobic foundation? How can I continue to level up my speed work to make it as specific as possible for the work that I'm doing and continue to incrementally load the system from that perspective so that I'm working on the aerobic system holistically and of course in a periodized way? What is my strength training routine look like in the overall equation? How am I managing recovery holistically with sleep and fueling and of course easy movement that comes with that recovery running? What is my process look like? Stay embedded there. I've told the story of Hank Aaron on this podcast and I'll briefly tell it again. He was one of the most prolific homerun hitters in major league baseball history. But he didn't do it by leading the league necessarily in homeruns or hitting the most homeruns in a season that anybody's ever hit. He just hit a lot of homeruns and he did it for a lot of years. But it wasn't the top of the pack in any individual year. It was just a consistent 30 to 40 homeruns a year for a long time. And so he had somebody ask him one time a reporter say, hey, Hank, do you think about hitting 35 plus homeruns a year? In order to get that goal every year. And he said, no, I actually don't think about the number of homeruns at all. What I think about is, what's my process to prepare myself as a hitter so that then I set myself up to hit homeruns? How many sessions am I doing from a batting average or from a batting practice standpoint? How much time am I spending in the cage? How much time am I spending working with my hitting coach adjusting and tweaking my swing? How much time am I spending preparing myself for the pitch pitchers I'm gonna face studying their tendencies, anticipating what they might throw at me so that I can go and hit it? He put metrics around process about the work that he would do, and then the home runs flowed from there, and that led him to be one of the most prolific home run hitters in Major League Baseball history. So the question for you as an athlete, speaking generally to all of the listeners is what's your goal? And then what's the process that will be required to get there? What are you going to need to be able to do to achieve it? How many miles per week are you going to need to run? How many strength sessions are you going to need to do per month? What is your process around recovery, sleep, fueling, easy movement, other recover modalities? What do your workouts look like? How are you executing them? What are your paces and your target paces, and how are you using those to continue to take the next steps? Those are the real questions. And if you can get that right and build incrementally, incrementally load the system, then the process will work. You will get what you want. And as I've talked about before, you've got to have duality of mind. I want you to always dream and think about the goals that you want, but then come back to you. Don't spend too much time there. Don't camp out there. Always come back to you. What's the next logical step? What is the next thing I need to do to get me on the path to that goal? And then take that step. So dream big, yes, but then get right back to the present and make sure you know exactly what you have to do next. So stay process focused. A process focused athlete who has a long term view is going to get more out of themselves than somebody who has a short term view and who's working backwards from a goal to try to take shortcuts to get where they want to go. That's just the reality of aerobic development and our sport. I've seen it countless times. So that's number two. Stay process focused. Number three and a close corollary to number two is that you want the process to dictate your interim goals and paces. You want the process to dictate your interim goals and paces. What do I mean by that? Well, when you're in this building phase, when you're in this building phase and you're starting to get faster and you're seeing the fruits of your labor in training, then it becomes interesting because you don't know necessarily how quickly you're going to be able to take forward steps. And for everybody that I've coached who's been new to working with me, we always have this period of sort of seeing what happens when you commit to the process, seeing how that then causes you to progress in the work. And there's sort of this figuring out period where you're trying to figure out how your body's going to adapt and how you're going to, what's your trajectory going to be. And there are people in that phase who want to say, oh, well, I want to go after this specific time in my next race. And what I will often tell them is we shouldn't be thinking about the time in your next race. We should be letting the process tell us what's possible. Collecting all the data points from training, all the data points from our long run workouts, all the data points from any prep races that you might do along the way, and then letting that tell us, combined with perhaps the goals you're thinking about, and combined with what type of race you want to have, and how you want to execute the race, and how strong you want to be at the end. Let all of that then tell us, all right, what's our strategy for the race, or what's possible given the data points that we've collected along the way. And so, instead of starting with a target, you let the target reveal itself through the process. And that can be a really difficult thing to do. But I think it's important for a couple of reasons. One, because usually people can't dream big enough. They don't even know what the process will actually reveal to them. And that can cause them to actually set limiting goals. I remember one time I started working with an athlete who was just trying to break four hours in the marathon. And I'm still working with him today. And that first training cycle, we did all the work. You know, he said, hey, I just want to break four hours. We did everything the right way, built him in gradually, applied all the training principles that we apply from a Rogue perspective to get to that race as prepared and healthy and strong as could be in his first cycle with us. And then suddenly, we were shooting for a time that was about 20 minutes faster than sub four, because that's what the process revealed to us. So it revealed to us that actually what was possible was something even bigger than the original goal. So that's one reason to do it. Another reason to do it is so that we don't overextend ourselves, because if we're trying to force paces, because we think we can run a certain time, then what's going to happen is it's going to short-circuit fitness building. You have to train where you are to get where you want to go. You have to train where you are to get where you want to go. And sometimes people want to train where they want to go, which prevents them from getting there, ironically. And so you actually want to stay present in your paces, train where you are with your current fitness in order to achieve the desired efforts from the workouts that we might give you. And then that will then allow you to naturally get faster. And then you go do a race and you pop a time and then we adjust. Or you do a time trial and you see that, hey, there's potential to perhaps increase those paces. And you do it in a way that's very measured, that's very much based on what the data is telling us. And it's all embedded in this idea of what's the current fitness and what does that mean about the paces I should be shooting for. Because you gotta train where you are with the fitness that you have, not over extending. If you can currently run a 5K in a certain time, then that is the 5K training pace you should be using in workouts that have 5K pace associated with it in order to ultimately run a 5K that is faster than that. That's as clear as I can say it. If you're running 5Ks in 8 minutes per mile, and you want to eventually run a 5K in 730 per mile, you don't train at the 730, you train at the 8, in order to get to the 730. And I know that might be mind-blowing or counterintuitive to you, but that is the way training physiology works. So, you don't want to take leaps. You got to train where you are to get where you want to go. You got to let the process dictate your interim goals and paces. And so, what happens is, as you go through the process, you do the volume, you hit your routine, you do workouts, you might have some prep races that reveal things to you. You take all that data, you look at how the efforts are at various paces and workouts, where maybe I say go do a tempo workout, which would be about half marathon pace, and you ask yourself, what was the effort after I ran that pace? Was it about right, meaning something that's controlled, but definitely a little bit hard? Or was it something where I was overextending and felt like I was on the edge the whole time? Or was it too easy? You ask yourself all those questions, you get that qualitative feedback along with the quantitative feedback, and then you get to the race and you say, okay, what does that mean about my fitness, about what's possible? And you pair that with questions about what kind of race do I want to have? Do I want to take a lot of risks and go for it? Do I want to be conservative so that I have plenty of room and energy in the tank to finish strong? Or do I want to hit it right down the middle of the fairway and just try to take a solid but not too risky of a swing at this? And then you put all that together and you get to an answer. And that's where me as a coach, you know, one of my roles comes in because I'm one of my superpowers as a coach is to help you figure this out. You know, I, I don't know what it is, but I have this ability to be able to tell based on all the data points and I don't have any calculators necessarily, but it just goes into my head and I say, all right, this is what's possible for you right now. And where that fits in the risk scale. So that's one of my strengths and that's a conversation that I have, but you can obviously have that conversation with your, with yourself as well. And those are the factors that you want to consider. Getting back to April's case, you know, she has this half marathon data point that would point to a marathon data point and using a calculator like McMillan's is a great way to estimate these things. And so, what I would tell you, April, is I want you to train where you are to figure out where you're going to go in this next marathon, recognizing that you may choose when you get to that marathon to make more conservative choices in order to give yourself plenty of room to crush that marathon and to finish stronger. I want you to have an amazing negative split in that race because, yeah, you're going to PR no matter what, but I want you to reinforce the idea that you're going to finish strong, you're going to crush it, you're going to run those last three miles as your fastest of the race. Learn how to execute a marathon in that way so that you can then build on that, grow upon that, and carry that to future races where you're taking a little bit more risk and you still have that confidence to finish strong. And so I would encourage you to train where you are, meaning train at the paces that McMillan is giving you. Let that reveal to you data points about your fitness as you get closer. And then potentially make a choice when you get to those race-specific questions in the final six, eight weeks of training that might be more conservative than those paces dictate to give you a little bit of room, a little bit of buffer, so to speak, to make sure they have that strong finish in you. And so you may choose to add five minutes or ten minutes to that total marathon target at the end for the purposes of giving you that space to finish strong. But you never know. You got to see how the training plays out, see how your fitness evolves accordingly, and then make good and smart decisions about execution based on that. Related point here that I want to emphasize is that there are training paces and there are race paces, and sometimes the two are the same, and sometimes you choose to make them different for whatever reason, sometimes faster or slower on race day. And training paces are there based on those calculators to get you into certain aerobic effort zones in order to get the benefit of the work that's being prescribed. And we use sort of race-specific pacing as a proxy to get you into certain effort zones. And it can be confusing, though, because some people want to say, all right, well, if I'm training at this 5K pace and this half marathon pace and this marathon pace, then that necessarily means I'm racing at those paces. But it doesn't. It means you're using those paces appropriately because you've run a half at that pace. You're using those paces appropriately to get in the right effort zones to get the benefit of the work. But then we separately make decisions about race pace that might be faster or slower, depending on all the factors that I just talked about. How is training gone? And how much risk do I want to take in this race? How much room do I want to give myself to have that strong finish? And in your case, April, I don't think we can necessarily have an answer yet. We love to talk about that as you get closer to your race. But I don't think it's crazy that you'd be thinking about breaking four hours. And somewhere between 337 and four hours is going to be your sweet spot. And we've got to see how this training cycle plays out to figure out the right sweet spot in that range. Now, some of you more experienced runners may be asking, well, what about me? What about someone who has a really long track record with training and a really long track record with races and who has specific goals that I'm still wanting to achieve? And for you, you still want the process to dictate the pace, and you still want to operate under the idea that you got to train where you are to get where you want to go. But I do think with someone that has more data points, meaning you've collected a lot of race data and you've collected a lot of training data, then you can start to get a little bit more specific, and your specific goals can play a bigger role in the conversation about what you might be shooting for from one interim step to the next. But you kind of have to earn the ability to do that. And for those that are earlier in their process, I would continue to let the process dictate the pace, and then I would default to that to even the most experienced and veteran runners. But then that goal and those numbers start to layer in to the thinking a little bit, and it becomes a factor that becomes more considered as you get four or five, ten years down the road of your running journey. Okay, that's point three. Let the process dictate your interim goals and paces. Number four, and this one I want to underscore, it's really, really important. And it might seem self-explanatory when I say it, but I don't think people treat it as seriously as I would want them to, which is that you have to recover as seriously as you go hard, or maybe even more seriously. You have to recover as seriously as you work out, as you go hard, as you build volume. I think people forget that, but it's absolutely critical. If you're not recovering properly, and for a minute, let's focus on the running side of recovery, meaning the recovery running side of the equation. If you're not going easy enough on your easy movement recovery days, your active rest, then you're not being patient. Then you're not getting your potential. Then you're definitely short-circuiting things and probably getting hurt along the way. Because you can only improve your fitness as much as you're willing to recover from the hard work. You have to balance stress and rest. Rest or recovery, active movement is when we actually consolidate the fitness gains. If we're not doing that, then we're on a path to not only suboptimizing fitness, but also to breaking ourselves, which will certainly suboptimize fitness. So, you have to treat running recovery as seriously as you treat working hard. And that requires an immense amount of patience. Because I can't tell you how many people I've coached who are very eager, who end up running every single day too fast. And in particular, their recovery days. Show me a person who's doing that, and I'll show you a person who actually doesn't want to get faster. Really. Who isn't really serious about it. And that may sound harsh, but it's true. Because if you understand the principles of training, if you listen to this podcast at all, you know that you have to recover in order to build fitness. We build and consolidate fitness in recovery. The hard workouts, the big long runs, that's when you tear down the body. The up weeks, that's when you tear down the body. We don't actually take strides or build fitness until we pull back from that and do our super easy recovery runs, at least two minutes slower than marathon pace or two and a half minutes slower than half marathon pace, at least, but likely more than that. And also incorporating those down weeks where we're pulling back on overall volume, pulling back a little bit on some of the speed, so that you can consolidate the gains of the up week and then build to a higher place. If you're not taking that seriously, which requires, I get it, supreme patience, then you're not serious about getting faster. And you might be able to sustain taking shortcuts around that for a short period of time, but eventually you will pay the piper, it will shorten your running career, it will cause you not to reach your potential, and it just doesn't work. It doesn't work. Hammering your recovery runs or not taking those down weeks and just maintaining volume, that is a recipe for not getting faster in the long term. So you have to treat your recovery as seriously as you go hard. It's interesting. I was talking about this concept with my strength coach this week. And this is actually where we were talking about a little bit of the difference between strength and running from this recovery standpoint. And he was commenting on the fact that he was studying another strength coach, and that strength coach was really prioritizing big deload weeks, meaning weeks that might happen in a strength context every six or seven weeks, where you take, you know, maybe 40 or 50 or 60 percent of weight off, and you do the same exercises you were just doing, but at 40 to 60 percent lower volume. And so he was talking about how that was interesting, you know, and he knew that deload was important, but hadn't really considered it that extreme in from a strength context. And I thought that was kind of an interesting question because from our perspective as runners, then we have to deload significantly more frequently than that. Not only do we at Rogue do down weeks every third week, but we're also doing two recovery runs a week. And one of the things that I was thinking about, we were talking out loud about with him, was the fact that when you're building strength, you might be working different muscle groups, but the body has a lot of them. So if let's say you're working, just to use a simple example, you're working chest and you're doing exercises where you're working chest. Oftentimes from a strength standpoint, you're probably only doing that once a week. Once a week, you're going and you're working on your chest muscles. And then the rest of the time, you're able to do strength, but you're working on different muscles. So those chest muscles are able to rebuild themselves. And by the time you get to the next week where you hit chest again, you've had six days of recovery on that muscle group more or less. And then it's able to tear itself down and build itself back up, and then continue to do that from week to week. So you can actually make some pretty good strides from a muscle building standpoint at chest. Contrast that with running where you might be running for a marathon or half marathon training cycle, you might be running five or six days a week. And yes, work in different parts of the aerobic system at different times, but also kind of hitting a lot of the same ones six or five or six days a week. And so the cumulative load and fatigue that we're taking on to our aerobic system by itself, not to even talk about our musculoskeletal system, is a lot more than you would if you were just trying to build strength in one muscle group. It's like five or six days a week of some sort of stimulus in that perspective, versus one day a week where you might work one muscle group in a strength context. And to me, that just underscored the fact that we need to take our recovery seriously and do it in many ways more frequently than someone does from a strength standpoint. So deloading every third week if you're going up, up, down is critical. And then making sure that after every workout and every long run, your next day is an active recovery process that includes movement, easy running. In many of those cases, although you could always do some other low impact, low intensity cardio, vascular exercises like bike or swim, but you need that movement because it creates blood flow, which promotes healing, which allows this system to then build itself, because that's where we're actually building fitness is in recovery. And if you haven't yet gotten to a point where you're treating that seriously, then I hope you're listening and you make those adjustments, because if you don't, you will not reach your potential. It's that critical. So, recover as seriously as you do the hard stuff. I can't underscore that enough. That is an absolute pillar when it comes to having the patience to reach your long term potential. So that's number four. Number five, when in doubt, make the conservative choice. When in doubt, make the conservative choice. And this, by the way, can apply in perhaps every single running context. I don't think you'll ever regret making the conservative choice in your decisions as you go. And I know, again, everybody thinks every little decision matters or have to optimize every single moment, but I don't think so. I think you want to make the conservative choice if you're not sure. Because if you do that, then you're going to give yourself longevity. You're going to give yourself more opportunity to improve down the road, and you're going to stay healthy along the way doing it. And no one workout matters. No one week matters in the grand scheme. It's about how you do and fitting them all together. And so if you're airing slightly on the conservative side pretty much all the time, then you're probably crushing it. But I know that's hard to do. It's hard to do, especially when we get excited when we're building and we're being a little bit overeager. And so when I'm talking about these decisions, what am I talking about? I'm talking about volume. When you're building from one week to the next, or when you're building your volume from one season to the next, oftentimes people want to go too fast. They want to go from 30 to 50 miles a week from one cycle to the next. When I'd rather recommend you only build by, say, 15 to 20 percent on those total peak volume weeks from one cycle to the next. So make the conservative choice there. And then when people think about adding intensity, they're, you know, always doing too much too soon, doing workouts that are too long, paces that are too fast, doing perhaps more reps than they should. But when you get to those decisions, and most coaching programs will have a range, and if you're not sure, choose the short end of the range. Or if you get into the workout, and you're having a sluggish day, and the paces just aren't there, stop a little bit early. I have another episode on building your running intuition that talks about this in quite a lot of detail. And so I would encourage you to go check that one out. That's episode 304. And the other thing here is, when you're making decisions about races, especially early in your journey, you know, make the conservative choice. Give yourself the slightly safer target time. There will be a time and a place to go for it, believe me. As I was talking about earlier, I'd rather you early in your journey, make a choice that allows you to finish well and finish strong so that you can build that memory and muscle memory of what that feels like, because that sets you up for then going to do that again and again and continue to get faster along the way doing it. And even as you start to take more risk, if you've assimilated that approach into your body and mind, it's going to allow you to optimize races into the future, because a negative split for races beyond the 8K really, is the optimal way to go about those things. And so when it comes to getting back to you, April, when it comes to a choice that you're going to make about this race and whether you choose 337, or 347, or 357, you're going to collect data points along the way to figure out what's a reasonable fitness perspective. And then I think you'll have a sense for what's possible. And I would encourage you to make the slightly conservative choice. Doesn't mean you have to make the wildly conservative choice. Make the slightly conservative choice, because we can always tell a lot about how we finish, about what your total potential was. I mean, if somebody comes in, and they make a slightly conservative choice, and then absolutely just dominate the last three miles, taking off something, I don't know, 30, 40 seconds a mile from what they had averaged throughout the race, then that tells us a lot. It tells us that, hey, maybe we were a little fitter than we thought, or maybe that you could have done more. And yeah, it might leave you hungry for more, but it also shows you that, hey, that more was possible. Versus if, you know, you're only coming in and you're cutting down 10 or 15 seconds, that tells us something. Or if you're just hanging on for dear life, then that says, hey, maybe we weren't as strong as we thought. But it always tells us information that we can use going forward to help set the tone for what's next. And so make the conservative choice. Win in doubt. I'd rather you finish strong and be hungry for more than the other way around. And this also means, by the way, for those that are more experienced, make the conservative choice about coming back from injury, about the number of races you do in a season. Just recognize that you've got a long-term view of this. There's plenty of time to get what you want. You don't have to do all the races now. You don't have to do all six majors in the next two years. You don't have to race every single distance from mile to marathon every single year. You've got time, pump the brakes, let it air out. Focus on two or three peaks a year. Give yourself time. Make sure you're mixing in the 5Ks and 10Ks seasons as well as half marathon seasons. You don't have to just go from marathon to marathon. Take the conservative choices. Don't build volume too fast. Don't integrate speed or higher levels of speed and longer durations of speed too fast. Take it slow. That's going to allow you to, with patience, reach longer term potential because you're going to stay healthy, you're going to stay solid, you're going to build incrementally in a way that gets you further than you ever thought. So that's number five. When in doubt, make the conservative choice. And the last one kind of goes with my fourth one. But I would say when in doubt, especially on easy days, slow down. When in doubt, especially on easy days, slow down. You got to go slow to go fast. This is a theme of my podcast. Going back to our very first episode, it is the thing. It is the thing, if I could instill any one single training principle in anyone, whether they're new or experienced, is you got to slow the F down more often than you think. That is the key to unlocking long-term potential and aerobic fitness. And I don't say it to baby you or because you aren't good enough or fast enough or prepared. I say it because if you do that, then you will stay healthy and you will get faster. You have to go slow to get fast. And if you haven't yet embraced that principle, then you're not serious about your potential. You're just not. I'll say it that boldly. Go back and listen to my episode 306. You've got to go slow to get fast most of the time. Yes, one speed work session a week for most people is right. The other days should be easy aerobic fitness building via easy conversational running. And if you're not doing that, then you're not only not in the right aerobic zone to build long-term potential and aerobic capacity, you're also likely in a place where you're putting too much stress on the musculoskeletal system that you will get injured from, and then that will short-circuit your ability to continue to build that aerobic capacity because you're not going to be able to run. You got to slow it down, and you can slow it down even more than you think. In fact, this is something where as a coach, particularly in one-to-one context, I try to set goals for people. People always want to compare one pace of a run to another and think that because I ran faster on this easy day, then that means it was better. When oftentimes going faster on one easy day to another means that the slower or easier pace day was the better one. So prioritize it as such with recovery runs, as we've already talked about. I'll set goals for people who will tell me, I can't run that slow. Like, yeah, you can if you just try to and work on it. And so I'll tell them, go out, run four miles in 44 minutes. That's your goal, to run four miles in 44 minutes. Not to see how fast you can run four miles. Your goal is to run four miles in 44 minutes and become good at running four miles in 44 minutes to the point where it becomes natural and effortless, which it will if you practice it. And then you have that in your quiver to pull out a four mile in 44 minute recovery run that's going to allow you to recover from that speed workout so that you can consolidate that fitness building in a way that makes you better. Like you just, you got to set, just like we try to achieve by getting faster, you also achieve by working at going slower when you should be. Not saying, well, because I ran this long run that was supposed to be easy, faster than that long, that was supposed to be easy, then that one's better. I had a better day or comparing your stuff on Strava and thinking about it from a pace standpoint relative to somebody else. No, no, no, don't worry about any of that stuff. Just ask yourself, can I go even easier? Can I finish a long run feeling even better by slowing down? Is it possible to cover the same distance? Maybe it's 14 or 16 or 18 or 20 miles. Is it possible to finish that run and feel even better? Because I've slowed down. If so, and why wouldn't you do that? Because again, we build aerobic capacity in a huge range. So does it matter where you are in that range? Short answer really is kind of no. So then why am I rushing? Because if I rush, it puts more stress on the musculoskeletal system. So then I'm beat up and debilitated from that long run versus cruising through it, feeling great, having good conversations with friends, and then feeling amazing afterwards to the point where, all right, now I can put more work, more hard work into my fast days. What if that was the unlock? Well, I can tell you it is. So when in doubt, slow down. If you're not embracing that, you're not being patient enough, you won't reach your long-term potential, you'll get hurt, and you'll suboptimize your work along the way. It's just facts. So that's my last point. When in doubt, slow down. And I'll carry that back to April, and I'll just remind you, April, don't get greedy about your paces, particularly on those recovery days. Yes, you're getting faster and fitter and progressing from that half marathon standpoint, and you will from the marathon as well. But I don't want you to necessarily let that mean that you get greedy on recovery days or easy days. Keep your rhythm there. Keep those nice and comfortable. And yeah, there may be a little bit improvement, and it might be a little bit faster naturally staying in that appropriate conversational space. But that isn't how we improve. We don't improve by comparing easy run paces. We improve by comparing races and by comparing workouts if we're getting faster at the appropriate efforts. So number six, my final point, when in doubt, slow the F down. Okay, April, coming back to you. Again, thanks for your message. Hopefully, this was a long way of answering your question. I do understand the disbelief that you're feeling. So I want to kind of talk about this as we wrap things up. The mental side is hard, where you think, man, how is that even possible? You start to go past the places where you thought you could dream, and that's scary. But I would say that it's okay. Fear is normal. It's part of the process. You wouldn't be doing this if you weren't willing to step into the unknown, and if you weren't wondering what would happen to you, and how you'd be able to stand up when you are in that unknown. So the fear and the disbelief is a normal part of the process, and it won't go away. It'll evolve, and it'll change, and you'll build confidence, certainly, but then you'll just set higher goals, and still have those same fears and disbelief in different formats. That probably isn't going away. I think fear is a necessary part of this improvement process. But the question is, okay, what do I do with that fear, and how do I overcome it? How do I develop tools to not linger there, but to move past it? And one of the best ways to do that, from my perspective, is really getting back to my second point, which is have faith in your process. If you do the work, if you do it consistently, if you follow the principles that I talked about here in this episode and on other podcasts, if you make those conservative choices, you're going to show up on race day, and you're going to be able to not know if you can do what you think you can do, because you won't have done it yet, but you'll be able to know the work you've done, and you'll be able to know that you can go out and run one mile at your target pace, and then you can do two, and three, and four, and so on. Until you get to that place where the unknown suddenly arrives, and then you just trust your training and let it do its thing. Mile 21, 22, 23, 24 will take care of themselves if you've done all the work in preparation appropriately, both physically and mentally. And so I have full confidence in you, April, and I know it's scary, but move past that fear into action by just really digging into your process. And what does that mean right now? It's time to build base, it's time to prime the system. You've got to fall marathon to run. So go get to work on that. And I look forward to hearing more updates from you soon. All right, y'all. There we go. Episode 377. Thanks to April for the email. Thanks to all of you for listening. As always, you can check me out or us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Instagram or Facebook at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.