Hey everybody, it is episode 63 of the Running Rogue podcast. Steve is with me here in Austin, Texas at Rogue. Hey Steve.

Hello Podcast World.

We're super excited to have a special guest today to finally get to a topic that we've been talking about for too long and just haven't been able to schedule. And we're talking, so, but yet, people have asked us continuously to cover this topic. And so today we're talking about training as a masters. Basically, as you start to age, what are some training considerations as you get older that you should bring into the mix? And so for that conversation, we have a rogue coach, the very venerable and famous in her own way, Carmen Troncoso, who is here to join us. Hey Carmen.

Hey everybody.

Carmen is one of our coaches. He coaches a 5K, 10K focused group here with us in Austin. And is basically a badass, a running badass. Has been competing herself at the professional level and at the masters level for a long time. And is basically an expert on this topic. So we're super excited to have her in the mix to talk about how you should think about training as you age. So we'll get to that in a second. Of course, we've got some big topics to go here. Steve, the Austin Marathon and Half Marathon was this past weekend. So we got some races to recap there. We're going to start on the women's marathon side because we had a big win, repeat, repeat win from Allison Maxis, who is one of our podcast guests, our longtime Rogue employee and the head of Rogue Expeditions for us here in Austin.

She was also coached by Carmen for a while.

That's true, when she first moved to Austin, she was coached by Carmen.

It was a good move for her.

Yeah, and when she moved up in distance, started working with Steve and is still coached by Steve, Allison Maxis won in 243, got the Olympic trials qualifying standard, won by three minutes over Ashley Paulson. Pretty much going away. I mean, she was unchallenged after about mile 10. The third place finisher, Dianne Arthur was with her through about mile 10, but then Allison pulled away on the rolling hills of Enfield and never looked back to pull away for a three minute win. You saw her, I know, a couple of times.

Yeah, I got to see her. I saw her at the, I mean, I saw everybody at about two miles. And then I saw her again at just before eight. And then I saw her at 15, no, 12. And then I saw her at 18. And I saw her near the finish. So I got to see her four times. She, you know, our plan going in, we didn't really know how real the two other runners were in the, who were in the field. Carmen just, I mean, Alison just had their, like their stats that had been given out. One had run a 246, one had run a 245. We didn't realize that Ashley had run her 245 at the Houston Marathon.

A month ago.

A month ago, correct. So she had a pretty, that's pretty.

A 246 is amazing, a month apart.

It is, very much so, especially on the Austin course. But I was a little worried that Alison would have more competition and that the women would try to run with her for a while. And Alison went out pretty fast last year on a really hot day. And I also wanted to try to be sure that she didn't go out too, too fast. So we set a plan to be pretty conservative the first three miles and then we were gonna race, whatever happened. But I made a, the day before, we do our pre-race stuff a little different. I do my pre-race stuff with Alison a little bit differently than anybody else. And I just said, I think that you, if there are ladies with you and you're having competition, you should push on infield. And she raised her eyebrows and was a little bit, I think she was all taken back by that. But having listened to your mile by mile description of the course, Chris, and then also going on the day before going online and checking the actual elevation changes during that section, I thought there were enough ups and enough downs that the other ladies would get conservative and Allison could be aggressive. And since she knew the rest of the course really well, she'd done two race prep workouts on the course before the race started. I thought it would be a good move and it really was. She was able to get away. She told me afterwards it was a clutch decision to make that, they never came back to her from there. She ran away from them, looked amazing at mile 18 and looked nearly as good at mile 25. She just had an epic day and I don't think people really can understand how fast 243 is low on this course. It was close, it's definitely nearly as good as her PR.

Yeah, I would say 240 shape.

Yeah, and we thought she was in 240, she thought she was in 245 shape. Her last workout she did, she looked as smooth as I've ever seen her, so I knew she was in a good rhythm place. I just didn't know how it would play out on this course, so I was really happy for her to get that B standard off the charts and this far out and not have to think about it, since she has a relatively busy life, it's nice to have that one done.

That gives her her third straight Olympic trials qualifying standard.

Yeah, it's pretty cool.

12, nearly 12 years of consistent work.

Is it a course record?

What's that?

Is it a course record?

Well, yeah, it's the first year.

Oh, that's right.

Yeah, so I think that record will stay for a little bit. Until they get more money, you know?

Yeah. So.

Impressive, pretty even splits there for Allison. We also have to give a shout out to Sarah Jackson, who trains with us in Cedar Park under Jen Harney. She ran a 258 to get fourth place in place in the money.

And she ran CIM. She did, yeah. She was tubbed three hours at CIM and then went, yeah, that's pretty amazing.

Really smart race for Sarah. She had a nice, solid negative split to run that 258, which was a PR for her, so congrats to Sarah. And if you wanna learn more about Allison, she's been a guest for us on our episodes two and 39, talking about some of our exploits with Rogue Expeditions and with the Wonderland Trail FKT last summer. On the men's side, the marathon was pretty uneventful in a lot of ways. Joseph Whelan, who won 3M a month ago here in Austin, basically ran away from the gun and ran a fairly even 221 to win it. Some people thought Craig Leon, who was coming off of running a 213 at CIM a couple of months ago, might be the favorite, but it looked like Craig decided to just kind of treat it as a long run. He said he's doing another spring race, another spring marathon coming up, so he was just trying to get in a pretty smooth, even rhythm race. And so Joseph won in 221. Craig also in fairly even splits. Craig Leon got 223. Daniel Bishop, 226. David Fuentes was on the podium till the very end, but lost in the final 2K as Daniel passed him.

Just not enough miles for him at this point. He's coming back off an injury and back into really getting back into competitive running. David will be back, I'm sure. Unless, not what he wanted, but still he'll be just fine.

He will be. Daniel Bishop, I don't know if some people might remember, he got second last year to Joe Thorne. Almost challenged Joe at the very end last year. So he's been on the podium two years in a row. And I would say the time from Joseph, pretty impressive to me, that he ran, what's like a 108, 109 at 3M, and then came back to run a 221 here. That's pretty, pretty good.

Yeah, I think it shows that he was, that he had another, he was either coming off a really hard training cycle for that race, or he had another, those two times are not, especially on the course that Austin is, those are not apples to apples.

He had another gear at 3M. So, switching to the half, pretty eventful half race on the women's side, Allison Mendez-Clever ended up second by only four seconds to Hillary Montgomery, who trains under Steve Magnus as well.

Yeah, they both do the same workouts, Ali told me.

Run 116 and were separated by four seconds. I know Ali made a move to try to catch her at mile 12 or close to mile 12.

She did catch her on the Monster Hill on 15th Street. Ali was still about three seconds, four seconds behind her. And Hillary came by us and she was jogging, like dying on that hill. And Ali was like doing her little crazy face, like, I don't really want to go any harder. I can't go any harder. And I just yelled at her, I won't tell you exactly what I said, but I got in her space. And I said, look at her, she's dying. And I ran alongside her for a couple of strides. And then Ali sort of realized, oh my God, she actually is dying up there. And by the time they crested that hill, Ali got by her. But she said, Hillary just tucked in behind her. She could hear her breathing and she knew the breathing wasn't a man's breathing, it was a woman's breathing. She was hoping she had dropped her. And you know, Ali ran the mile the day before.

So she didn't have any gears in that race, she said.

And she didn't have any gears left over. I said, she probably would have won if she didn't run the mile, but it's still probably okay to have run the mile. You know, you have a plan, you execute your plan and you don't worry about it, you know?

Yeah, she looked great in the mile too.

Yeah, her coach didn't care because he was gonna win no matter what.

Either way. What did she run in the mile? I didn't see that.

501. 501, but she went out pretty hard and got herself into some trouble and then came back a little bit. But that race went out pretty fast. It was, it was.

So what place did she get there?

The fourth, I think.

Cause Dana won.

Dana won and then Jen and then somebody else was in there. Oh, Marybeth Hamilton, who is a UT, she has one more season of Eligibility Outdoors for UT. She ran a fourth. So Marybeth Hamilton ran a 443 in the Husky Meet this, this just a couple weeks ago.

Interesting.

Yeah, the times were pretty good for that, for just a little bit of race.

It was a big race for Jen Hall. We finally, you're seeing her at her strength in the event that she really is the best at, which is a 1500 and her coach Ryan is trying to get her to be able to be better at the 5K. So he's making her do some of these non-traditional races for her. But when you see her in her main event that she did really well.

So Hillary and Allie were both 12 and 116. Jocelyn Todd, about a minute back in 117 to round out the podium on the half. For the women on the men's side, Patrick Smythe ran a blazing 104 on this course. You know, Patrick was a marathon Olympic trials qualifier back in the day, but it's been probably eight years.

Well, he went to the mountain running. He's been on a couple, made a couple of world mountain running teams, like Fuentes has. But he was gone. When I saw them at mile seven or eight, he had, he, I swear he had a mile on the field. It was, he was absolutely gone and he looked really, really good.

Yeah, so he won going away in 104, the second place and third place were 108, about 30 seconds apart. I think it was Robert Root and Luke Humphrey. Luke Humphrey trained with a Hanson's runner. Although I haven't seen his name in a while. 108 seems kind of slow for him, so I don't know. Maybe he was treating it as a workout or something like that. So, solid races all around though. Pretty competitive and fast times for a tough Austin course. Congrats to everybody who raced. We had lots of rogues out there. I gotta give a shout out to the marathoners, particularly in my group. I had four marathoners run and all of them PR'd and executed a solid plan with nice finishes.

Were you running or were you pacing?

I was pacing a friend, a couple friends really. It ended up Tim and Jay kinda were together. So, I was working with both of them. And then I went to the finish to see some of my runners at the end. But it was a good day overall for a lot of rogues. But, you know, tough. I mean, the course is tough. Conditions were pretty good. I think those that were affected by the humidity more than others might have had a tough day. I know that Hiram, who I was pacing, struggled with the humidity because he tends to lose a lot of fluid that way.

Yeah, and the same thing happened with Richach, who also has challenges with that. Although I think he was loading up on Gatorade really early in the race, and that probably had a bigger effect on him. But, you know, my team, Rogue Athletes, had a really, really good day given the conditions. We took it pretty conservatively with most of them. And followed damn near exactly your plan. So, the only person who didn't follow that plan to a tee ended up having a really, really good day. But I think he was just ready, really, really, really, so.

Yeah. So, I mean, yeah, for me with the plan, all the feedback I'm getting, it seems like it was a pretty, pretty dead on. You know, I had a random person come up at the end of the race and say, she got her sub four thanks to the plan. Had a few other. We got an email today from somebody who got a Boston Qualifier following the plan. So that's good to hear. Although if you have feedback and you ran it, you following my plan one way or the other, whether you got your goal or not, definitely shoot me an email. I would love to hear feedback. Chris at roguerunning.com. You can always reach me there.

All right.

So that was Austin. Overall, congrats to the High Five Events team for putting on another amazing race. And congrats to all of the finishers there. We also have to talk about USA Indoors. Now, as a recap, we did a little bit of predictions on the last one, Steve, and we might as well start with the Men's 800 because I pretty much just nailed it.

Yeah, you did.

Podium, one, two, three, got them all right.

Yep, in order.

In order and each name correct. So Donovan and Brazier got the win. Drew Windle ended up second coming from behind. And then Eric Sawinski rounded out the podium there. Donovan and Drew are both going to their world teams. That's Drew's second world team. And Donovan and Brazier almost got the American record, but he kind of let up at the very end and let it go.

Yeah, it's inexplicable. And then afterwards he made comments saying, I didn't know how close I was, but as you said, Chris, he was looking right at the clock.

The clock was right there.

Either it means that he didn't know what the American record was, which is entirely possible. He is basically 19 years old, right? I don't know if he's even that. I don't know exactly how old he is now, but he's somewhere, I think he's still in his teens. But yeah, believe me, those records are coming. All records, except for the world record, potentially are coming for him. I do think he has the skill set to be in a world record holder, but that record that was set on that Olympic Games in the greatest 800 meter race that's ever happened ever is gonna be a tough one to catch. But he is definitely proving now that he can run consistently from the front, from the back, any way he needs to, although he's smart enough to know to stay in an indoor race near this front as far as he can.

Yeah, I mean, and he was smart. I mean, Eric Swensky had to take it out because he didn't have the standard, so he took it out the first 400. Donovan kind of tucked in and then made a, then Brazier just made a definitive move just after the 400 point and shut it down. Drew was running at the very back and then came all the way back in the final lap, essentially, to get that second spot. So you gotta give him credit for sticking to his plan.

Yeah, but I almost got it. I almost, I would have gotten it right though if Clayton Murphy hadn't been a complete and utter bonehead.

Murphy crapped the bed in the preliminaries.

We would have expected Donovan to do that, not Murphy, but yeah, he just gave Wendell too much room on a guy that can close nobody's business. And as fast as Clayton is, he should know that he can't really close with Wendell. Drew Wendell's just too much of a closer. And he'd gapped him enough. And to Clayton's credit, he was closing down on Wendell, but just didn't have enough room. And it was too late. So he didn't make the final. He's in the first heat only. And that was a little bit weird the way they decided to spread those heats out. They changed things on them. But anyway, we won't go into the minutia for our listeners. There's a lot of things that happen with how they seed races and where they, I mean, how they seed them and how many heats they run and how many they're gonna take out of each heat. And when they change those things right coming into the championships, athletes are used to having them play out the way they think they're gonna play out. And when they don't, it can adjust strategies a lot. And then there's the luck of the draw and who you get.

Yeah, part of that, we can chalk up to USATF bullshit.

Which we're happy to do.

So Braze, you got the win. And the men's day, women's day, the favorite, Aji Wilson easily did her thing. I mean, she looked smooth in the prelim winning that. And then one kind of going away in the final. But Raven Rogers, her soon to be training partner was right there on her shoulder trying to close her down at the end, but she just couldn't get it. And they had gapped Kayla Edwards who got third by a full second. At the end, the big surprise to me was Charlene Lipsy, who also trains with Wilson was just DFL. I mean, she was not to be seen in the final.

Actually, that's played out for her all this year. She had an incredible 2017 campaign, but 2018 is turning out to be an utter dud for her. She's gonna have to get her head on straight and figure out what's going on. Maybe she's been sick. Maybe she got hurt earlier in the year. I don't know, but she is not running well right now to the point where I wouldn't even, if I were a coach, I wouldn't even put her on her starting line. She's not doing herself any favors to get dead last. Barely make it into the final, then get dead last in the final is not a good thing for her. That's not a good place to be.

Yeah, and she wasn't even competitive, which is the weird part to me. So, Ozzy Wilson and Raiden Rodgers, Officer World Champs, that's Raven Rodgers' first world, or US team, I believe, if I'm not mistaken. So, congrats to her. Those three training together, though, will be quite a force.

Oh, it's gonna be incredible. And Raven is, I mean, Ozzy is the real deal. We all know that. She's really relatively young. Remember, she did not actually go to college. So she's really, in a lot of ways, almost the same age, around the same age as Raven. But Raven is, her 400 meter wheels are incredible. She won an NCAA Championship title on a four by four for Oregon on a couple of different occasions. And she's, they're gonna be a great training crew in that group. It's gonna be really interesting to see how they dominate over the next couple of years.

And all four of those athletes who are sending in the eight, I think have a chance, a good chance to medal in Birmingham in the UK coming up here for the World Championships because indoor eight, so it's like you just never know.

It is, it's true.

I mean, so all of them will be competitive, particularly Brazier, if he can be smart and Wilson. But I think Wendell and Rogers have a chance to be in the mix too, if they play their cards right. So we'll see, that'll be something to watch. And we'll certainly have that preview coming up. So going to the 15, we'll start on the men's side there, both the 15 and the 3K were doubles.

And they ran them the same way.

Chalimo and Houlihan, well, not really, I mean.

Well, they didn't run their races the same way. I mean that they won, both of them won their races nearly the same way for both of them. But Chalimo did it his way, he pulled his Mo Farah. He ran his race, get to the front with a couple laps to go and then running everybody off, right?

Yes, so yeah, Men's 15, Chalimo won. You know, and Chalimo is a 5K runner, essentially. I mean that's where he's been focusing on the outdoor side, but he basically dictated the Men's 15 from the front and took the lead with about 800 to go and just never looked back and outkicked the guys at the end. Ben Blankenship could have had him, he got second, but he was too far out, you know, going into that last lap.

But Chalimo closed in 26.7, too.

He did, but Blankenship closed faster.

He did, and if he had been a little, you say if he had been a little closer, could he have caught him, but you have to realize that he would have had to have run faster during that section and those puts and takes, as you like to say, they all add up somewhere. So it doesn't really matter, because Chalimo won. But I'm glad Blankenship is going on the team because he's somebody who has more of an opportunity to be of impact, in my opinion.

Well, Chalimo's not racing the 15. He says he's just doing the 3K. So angles goes.

Right, which is great for the US because he really needs to get into what... He's been really close to making teams before, but he hasn't made one. And it's great for him to make a team in his very first year as a pro.

And Ben Blankenship is just a salty racer. So you never know, depending on how that race plays out.

And supposedly he's 38 years old.

He's been cagey about that. Nobody knows how old Ben Blankenship is, apparently. And he won't answer the question.

Well, and he wears that headband. I mean, for all intents and purposes, it could be a hippie burnout from the 60s and 70s, because he wears that weird headband and that long hair and beard.

But this is Craig Eagles.

This is Craig Eagles who got third in his first world team now training for the Oregon Project. So at least, in spite of Murphy not making it in the eight, they get Angles to go in the 15. And the women's 15, to me, was an absolutely fascinating race, because it came down to the last lap. And Shelby Houlihan, who won the 3K as well, basically went into that last turn.

Yeah, 50, 75 meters from the finish.

In fifth and won, a la Jenny Simpson style, just absolutely crushing the final straightaway. Colleen Quigley got second, who, and so you picked that one too accurately. And then Shannon Sika got third, and she's going to get to go to the world team as well, because Houlihan's going to focus on the 3K as well. Really fascinating race to me. It was kind of interesting how that one played out, because it was relatively slow early, but then it started to heat up. And then you had one after another of kind of pretenders go and try to take it in that last lap. It started with Cory McGee right before the last lap. Then Sarah Vaughn tried to take it, and then Quigley finally got to the front, but then Shelby came around her at the end. So it was like, it was all about patience for Houlihan, and she was the one who waited till the very end and let it go at the right time for the win, but it's obvious that she is sharp, sharp, sharp right now.

Yeah, it was, I mean, I don't think that... I think she is a real chance to medal in the 3K. That's a big, big, big statement given how talented the world is, but it's also an indicator of how far the US has come in these middle and long distance races. It'll be very interesting to see how that plays out. I'm excited to make our predictions for Worlds.

Yes, and Quigley has a chance too, I think, going in the 15 because she has shown that she's pretty sharp as well. So we'll see, and that's more of a tactical race, so it could be interesting. On the 3K side, it was basically US Army on the men's side.

It was crazy.

They had three of the top four. Ryan Hill from the Organ Project tried to get in the mix, but he's just outmatched. I mean, Chalimo again, kind of winning from the front. Kipchachere right behind him.

Kipchachere was all over that track. I mean, at the end, Ryan said he shouldn't be DQ'd. It would be silly to have another DQ, and Jerry's not Alberto, so he's not gonna try to throw in. This is in reference to a couple years ago where Alberto protested and protested, but regardless, Shadrack Kipchachere looked like Brenda Martinez there, flying all over the track, running, getting to everybody's way, banging into people. I mean, but how many times have we said Shadrack Kipchachere's name in the last six months, Chris? I don't, this guy, they've raced all, yeah, Chilimo hasn't raced so, so much, but Shadrack Kipchachere has raced as much as Leonard Carrere has and Chilimo has, won everything from 20K all the way down to now a 3K, and was in the mix in the 1500 with 50 meters to go, still in the mix. I don't, that guy is, that is just crazy to see how good he has gotten over the years. He's, to me, Shadrack Kipchachere, when you look at a world team, and outdoors, and you look at the, where he could be in 2020 from an Olympic standpoint, as much as we're bullish on Chilimo, I think Kipchachere is somebody we've gotta be talking about because he's got such a range, he's so strong, and he's definitely feeling his oats. He is definitely racing every chance he gets.

Well, and Chilimo, both those guys will have a chance at Worlds.

Yeah.

The question to me is, what do you do if you're Ryan Hill? You know, here's a guy who came into the Orkin Project as a 1500 meter specialist, who had a monster kick, who used to dominate in longer 3K or 5K races, because if he was close, going into a last lap, Ryan Hill was gonna out kick people. But now, he can't do that. Chilimo's got him, Kip Tchizir's got him. I mean, think about if King Chesirek was in this race, what that would look like.

I don't think Chilimo would have won, I can tell you. It would have been even worse for Hill.

But the point is, if you're Hill, what do you do?

I think the only thing you can do is get to the front the way Emma Coburn tried to do it in the 3K. You've gotta get to the front earlier. You gotta stay in the front. You gotta wind it up. His kick is a wind up kick. The problem is, is that can he wind up and kick? Which we know Chilimo can, he's done it. And I mean, Chilimo's an Olympic silver medalist. So, Ryan Hill, it's just...

It's tough.

Yeah, it is tough.

It's tough. I mean, for anybody that's not US Army on the men's side, it's a tough go. And if on the women's side, if you're not Nike Oregon project, sorry, Bowerman Track Club, then you're basically on the outside looking in as well. Hula Hand took the 3K here. Now, Maria Hall on her teammate didn't have it at the end. She ended up fifth in this race, but this one came down to Coburn pushing it with 800 to go. Basically splintering the group into three left for two spots. Hula Hand, of course, we knew would win because she had the major kick. Coburn, though, couldn't hold off Katie Mackie at the end because Katie fought for it.

She wanted it bad.

She wanted it badly. Coburn knew. She knew she didn't have the kick to hang with those ladies, so she took it from 800 to go, but she probably should have started winding up from further out.

Yeah, in her interview, she said that she thought others were winding enough. Lauren Pickett kind of picked it up a little bit there for a while, and then somebody else took over for a little bit, but they weren't pushing it enough, so she had to go to the front at 800. I mean, it was the only way she could do it. If she'd gone at 1200 or 1000, I don't think she would have won. She might have been able to shake the tree enough to shake Katie off, but Katie, when you get her close enough to a finish line, she knows how to kick. You know, she's been really close to making Olympic teams. She was fourth in the 2016 Olympic trials, but it was really exciting for Katie to make a world team after what was her 14th try to make a world team and a world Olympic team, and she finally got it.

She's been an alternate three times. So she said, it's about fucking time. I made a team in her interview. And anyway, congrats to her. Big result for her. That's the second Brooks Beast athlete to make a world team as well. Drew Wendell being the other one. So now they have their third world birth, with Drew having two and Katie Mackey having the third. Fun races, though, all around.

Yeah, it was exciting.

The only thing I would say is they were on NBC. I was able to watch it because they had it on NBCSN. But man, Craig Mazback, we've got to find somebody else. He's the worst.

He is the worst.

He's the worst.

It's crazy because he was a world class miler. He should be better than this.

He's just too dry. He is. It's just like.

Am I allowed to say anything bad about people?

Yeah, you can say whatever you want. You can drop F bombs.

You can edit this. But Rikard and I were just dying with Carmelita Gitter. Yeah. We were like, come on. So right now I feel like her listening to you guys. I'm like, oh, but man, that was bad.

Mazback's terrible.

He's terrible.

Yeah.

He's terrible and he's just so boring. I mean, there's stories to tell and then the guy they're interviewing people afterwards, he's terrible too. I mean, he was the same guy they had at Millrose and he, I remember after Aji Wilson and Kuru broke the four by 800 meter relay record, he goes up to the four of them and he's interviewing them and he goes, congrats to everybody. I'm just going to talk to Aji. It's like a mic in her face and asked one question and the other three were just standing there like, what, wait?

Well, Louis Johnson is a market improvement, but he's at the Olympics. So he's, you know, he's, he's, that is the one person who it's nice to have there because he can do the, he can do it better.

NBC, get a new color guy on the, just deal the guys from the BBC.

Take the BBC, take the BBC is like fourth, fourth string, fourth string commentator and they're way, way better.

Anybody want to, with the accent.

Exactly, and they can talk about their vests and whatever else.

First losers.

That's the US team for Worlds. We'll definitely do a little bit of a Worlds preview coming up, so stay tuned for that. As that goes off in Birmingham in the UK. All right, so let's get to our topic, Steve and Carmen. We've got to talk Masters training. But before we get into that, Steve, I'm going to let you go into it so that, so that our listeners understand a little bit about who they're hearing from here in Carmen Troncoso, who has an absolutely ridiculous resume, particularly at the Masters level, but really all the way through her professional running career. And it is amazing coach as well. So give us a little preview.

Sure, so Carmen, Carmen was born in New York City, but grew up in Mexico. I think you moved with the United States in what, 83 or 84?

Back to here, yes.

Yeah, yeah. 83. Yeah, so you'll hear as she's talking, she has a little bit of an accent.

New York accent.

Yeah, New York accent. She was basically a tennis player for most of your youth, correct?

Correct, I didn't know you knew that.

Yeah, he was a tennis player for most of her youth and then got on the track and did some sprinting and long jumping. Carmen, just so you know, is like five foot one and probably weigh like 95 pounds, somewhere around there.

No, I'm up now.

Still looks like she's in high school though.

She's teen icy, to think of her being a long jumper is still a little bit of a stretch for me.

Like Ricardo would say, the short jump.

The short jump. But she moved to Austin to get her master's degree at UT in exercise physiology, so she knows her stuff when it comes to sports science. She started really, really succeeding and was a really good track runner, but also really found her niche in cross country. And most people who knew you in the late 90s, early aughts, knew you as a ferocious cross country competitor, but also someone who had a chance to make a team or be on the edge of making a team. Of course, the distance that was a world team or Olympic teams in the late early 90s was the 3K distance, which was a little bit shorter than your expertise, probably. You were more of a 5K runner and maybe even a 10K in some cases. But Carmen, just so you know, Carmen made four world cross country championship teams. So that's about as good as you can get other than being an Olympian, qualified for three Olympic trials, correct?

Yes.

Take three Olympic trials.

And then ADA was an exhibition for the 5, 000. So that was where I just started going, oh, maybe I can do this. So I went as an exhibitionist.

So she had a really, really high level competitive career as a, what we would call elite athlete, but pre-Masters athlete. And then actually interestingly, in her 40th and 41st year, she made two of her world cross country teams as a Masters Runner, which is pretty amazing. And then after that was just ran away with every Masters result nearly that you, every time you showed up to US cross championships, every woman over the age of 40 just slumped. Everybody but Jody Hawkins, right? Nobody else wanted to.

Well, she wasn't there until like, I was 46 or something.

Yeah, she was five years younger than you or six years younger than you. But Carmen won something like five or six national championships as a Masters runner. I couldn't even go back to find the results for what you did on the roads, because all through those years, you were also assaulting the roads, had world US records and still hold a few US records at Masters distances. Can you give us a little bit of, I was looking for those, but I couldn't find all of them.

The only one that is still holds right now is the 40, the 3000 at 40, I mean, Masters record at 40, and it is, if I'm not mistaken, is 928. So that still holds. And then I had the five and I had the 10 and I had the five miles, but they're all gone.

Yeah, your 5KPR is 1550, but your Masters 5KPR is 1605. So you didn't, you didn't, your aging did not really play for you early on. As you got older, it seemed like you, I remember talking to you after you turned 45 or so and you're like, ah, starting to feel it. And then talking to you at 50, you were like, okay, we're making major adjustments. And that's part of what we want to talk about today is your experience as a Masters athlete and how that's played out in terms of you sort of, you're really self, you and Ricardo co-coach you, right? You're almost self-coached with great result, with great help from your husband, Ricardo, who actually was my coach for a while.

We have stories on that.

If I was even coachable, which is very much a question, but yeah, so you've got all that experience on yourself but also through all these years, you've been coaching athletes really since the early 90s consistently. So you've also watched some of those athletes that you were coaching in the 90s, you're still coaching today, or maybe three to five years ago. And so you've worked with athletes at every level from going from 40 all the way up to 60, 70.

70 now, yeah, some 70s.

And you're knocking on the 6-0 door soon, correct? What? Is it coming? It's coming soon? It's coming soon to a theater near you?

Yeah, next year.

We're talking, Masters, so you can't avoid age discussion.

Yeah, yeah, yeah, next year.

But not only are you gonna be great for this episode from your own personal standpoint, but also from a coaching standpoint and the background that you have working with athletes. So hopefully our listeners will recognize Carmen's bona fides with that and recognize her as hopefully being able to provide a whole lot of information for her.

Legit.

It'll be only the weakness of our questions, not the weakness of our answers for sure. Her experience is there.

She's approaching 60 and can still beat most of those listening in a 5K.

That's exactly true.

Including maybe even me.

No. My goal is to be ickrase.

It wouldn't surprise me and I would gladly accept that loss with humility. So as we get into it, and so you've kind of experienced this from 40 to 60 now or close to 60, we're not gonna put you there yet, Carmen. But first question that I know people ask, and I get this a lot from athletes I coach, from emails we've gotten is, at what point do you start slowing down? How long can you train before you have to reset expectations and sort of reset personal records and think about, your fastest times are behind you, but now I can sort of reset the bar, so to speak, and try to set Masters PRs or whatever it may be. How old can you go and still get faster?

Well, physiologically, I think, you can talk about just the general, what we know for everybody, it would be like the research says. It's about, you start slowing down just around 40, but to me it's very hard to say, you're 39.9 and then you turn 40 and you're gone. So it's somewhere around there. What I have, so also the research that I was looking at some stuff right now. So you go from 40, your first decade, 40 to 50, and maybe 50 to 60, it's just more or less, you can figure it out. After that it gets progressively, you lose a lot more. You lose double of the previous decades.

After 60.

After 60, yeah, I'm going to say 65 because I'm too close to that.

Here's the conflict, right?

That's what I found. But the other thing is that back 20 years ago, you found a lot of things about masters that are being proved wrong right now because there weren't that many people continuing running. So somebody like me at 55, 30 years ago, was impossible to think about it. And now I'm one of thousands and thousands. So I think things are changing and they're going to continue to change. But I also think that it depends when you start slowing down, so that not to be that negative, is depends a lot on your background. And when did you start? When, how much you have done? And how sporadically you have done it? So that becomes very individual at one point. My observation is that we have about 12 years of really, really hard work in our legs, no matter what distance you're running. And so if you start at 12, you're gonna peak pretty early in your 20s. But that means like very, very hard work. I mean, like just an elite runner at that age. But if you start at 35, then you can be doing PRs at early 50s. But it all depends on your...

So if you start later, you've got a little bit more time.

In certain ways, for you. You have more time for you, but for your abilities and everything. And so if you train really hard, then you still have those 12 years. And this is just very non-proven. This is just like my observation with elites, with the runners that I coach, and with myself.

You know, my experience coaching Masters athletes is most of the athletes that come to me, come to me where they started running in their mid-30s or maybe even 40. And for some of them, when they tell me that, I'm like, oh, we've got PRs till you're 50, 55. And they look at me like I'm absolutely crazy. And I'm like, we've got a lot of room to improve. But if they come to me and they've been running since they were 20 at a high level, I'm always like, well, maybe our fastest times are behind us. And let's see if we can't do our very best, which I could be talking to an athlete at the same age in a one-on-one meeting and tell them two completely different things based mostly on what their background is and how much hard running they've done. But I do think someone like Jordan Hussay will be a great example over the years to see does this play out all the way. But I'm sure we'll get into these discussions about mileage and other things as well because those things play into all of it.

Yeah, and it also has to do with how smart you are in your training. So if you take your time to, even when you're younger, to take a break and recover and everything. So you can stretch that time a little bit. And then what type of work do you do? Do you do too much mileage and too little intensity? And so it depends on a lot of things, but you can still PR. And the easiest way to PR when you're older is just find the distance that you've never run in.

There are tricks.

There are tricks to it.

I still have lots of PRs in me if I wanted to.

Or move to the trails and go for trail PR. So there's different ways to skin it. But we have a lot of athletes in their 50, early 50s that are still PRing in our groups because they did, as you said, Steve, start a little bit later. So 40 isn't necessarily that line unless you started in your 20s, in which case it's gonna be more difficult to keep building and improving. So it is relative. It's also relative to how you manage the whole process, as you were alluding to, Carmen. One thing I wanna help you understand before we talk about training considerations is what's actually happening physiologically to runners as they age. That's causing that speed to decrease. Are we losing aerobic capacity? Are we losing muscle strength? What's happening physiologically?

Well, all of the above. But I think, I mean, it's not all lost. I think you lose, so you have your given VO2 max. And no matter who you are, you're born with this thing. And VO2 max is the ability of your body to send blood to your muscles, or yeah, to your muscles. And then the muscles be able to extract that oxygen from the blood and then transform it into energy. So how efficient you are in that process dictates how high your VO2 max is. And that's just a number thing. So you can improve your, like your blood volume and all that. And so that's why people go to altitude. But let's say we're still in Austin, we're here in Austin. So what happens to your, it could be your central system, which is your heart and your, so how far is your heart is beating and how much blood is it sending out, right? So you have those two things. That I wasn't sure, I didn't remember exactly where I was. I went and kind of looked it up a little bit right now. And it's still the same, what I found out is that you don't really lose that much. And if what, you lose a little bit of the heart rate, how many beats per minute you can, your body can beat. But how much blood every beat is the important thing. That doesn't change. The stroke volume, right? The stroke volume, yes. And so that doesn't change that much. So it's not enough to account for the losses per decade. So what starts happening, so I went to the periphery, which is like your muscle. So basically, yes, you lose muscle mass, which means that every single one of your muscles loses the ability to extract that oxygen. So that's where you start losing that part of the VO2 max. So the oxygen extraction capacity of that. So that's one of the major things I think it is. But the other one, as you get even, I'm gonna say 40s and 50s, 40 to 45, I mean, 40 to 55, you might not see that much of a detriment there if you keep doing the same things. But I think if after that, then you also start getting the neuromuscular, so you start slowing down on how quickly your brain sends a signal to your muscles to contract and relax. So it's not so much the contraction where I found in the research is a relaxation. And same thing with the heart. So you might be able to pump as much, but your heart can't relax as quickly. And so it fills up slower. And so that's one of the things. And you can't do anything about that part. So that thing.

So training affects that zero.

Zero, yeah. Where the other ones, which is the muscle mass and all that, it's really easy, not easy, but you can stop it a little bit with weight training, with dynamic exercise and all that. And then the other one very important is the flexibility. And you start losing the, not so much the muscles, but the flexibility in your tendons. And so your stride starts getting shorter and shorter because you don't have that power to generate from the tendons. So more stretching and more, I also found that the more, it has to be more dynamic stretching and not the static stretching that you have to do.

So from a meta level, from the top level, what are sort of like the three biggest things you would tell an athlete? Let's just say we're gonna choose an athlete now who's 45 years old. And then we'll do it for 55 and 65. What are the three most important considerations or factors that they need to look at in their training? If you had to say from the meta level, you had five minutes to discuss something on the track to say these are the three things that you need to do to improve you the most at 45, 55 and 65. Do they change or are they same?

I would change them a little bit, but more than anything, I would change the percentage that you focus on each one. But I would say rest and recovery would be the most important one. And you have to, and this I was guilty of not doing the first time, which was around 43 to 44 when I started seeing like, I was getting a little more sore spots and injuries. And so it took me a couple of years to realize what was happening. So what you wanna do is like focus more on your recovery than how hard you're training. If you focus on the recovery, I think you can lengthen the amount of time that you can work just as hard, but you're gonna have like two or three more days in between those workouts. So you're maximizing the efficiency of your workouts and your long runs or whatever you do. So rest would be the first one when you're 40, 45. Rest and recovery and make sure that you adapt your training as soon as you can because it's just not... Talk to anybody who's already 50 and they're gonna tell you I should have done this a little bit earlier. But nobody wants to believe that you're getting that right.

Unless you're like me and you didn't run for 20 years and then you get back at it and you're made painfully aware of that there's significant limitations.

And then secondly, and I would actually stress this prior to 45. So if you're 35, start doing weights, that's what we do. Because once you start getting into those losses, then it's extremely hard to come back, to bring back the muscles. And you lose, I mean, the things that you can see are obvious, right? You can see, oh my God, my hamstring is gone or my butt is gone. But inside, we lose the fast-twitch muscles first. And those are gone. So if you had any fast-twitch muscle and it's gone, you can't recover it because you can't build it up. So it's what you're born with that, you know, allows you to run either fast or faster. But if you lose it, it's gone. And the slow-twitch muscle are, you can recover those a little bit. You've seen people going to weight training programs and they just change their bodies completely. You don't need to do that, but you can reduce the slowing process, I guess. But I would start in the 30s, in your 30s. So if you're on your way at 45 and you're doing that, you're going to be good for another 10 years before you start losing it. And then nutrition, that's the only thing that I would start changing a little bit.

Nutrition?

Yeah, and I don't know a lot about, I just know what works for me, what helps me, but I'm not a nutritionist. But I would say you really have to make sure that you're not, just the obvious junk food. So if you want to train the best that you can train, no matter what distance or, I mean, no matter what speed or who you are, you need to be very mindful of what you put in your body too.

Is that because, as you age with that, is that because your body is going to process those foods much better? I'm assuming that's part of it. And how much of it is that and how much of it is, I have noticed that as I got over the age of 50, my metabolism has slowed down and I hold weight much, much longer. So if you don't eat correctly, you're going to gain weight quickly. Is that?

Well, I wasn't thinking that, but yes, that's one major point there. Yeah, because when I turned 50, that sort of happened to me and I could eat anything I wanted before that and nothing would happen. And then suddenly I was on the other side of 90, for me that you said, and just going up and up and up. And then so I had to kind of really be mindful of what I was eating, even though I always eaten well and everything, I had to be careful and I had to really pay attention a little more. But also because we stop, just as we get older, we stop producing naturally a lot of nutrients or a lot of enzymes and a lot of, well, a lot of enzymes that are gonna process those foods. Yes. And so you need to kind of be careful with that a little more.

So what change, you said at 45, you said rest and recovery, weight room.

Weight room and nutrition.

And nutrition. What differences would there be or additions, maybe it's even easier to say additions on as you go to 55 or 65. Or how does that, what would change or does it change at all? Are those still the same three factors that are crucial?

Well, I would say those are my three most important factors the whole way. But I would, I don't know what I would start focusing a lot more in flexibility. Like trying to do, focus on the little things, which I tell my runners, which is like, if we can afford it, get a massage as often as you can because you need to get flush all the waste product out of the legs. You can, if you can't afford that foam rolling, I have no idea how it works, but it works.

So there's no doubt about that.

It's just, yeah, I mean, it's just this simplest thing. I keep thinking it's, I, this is a gift that we didn't have when I was 30, right? And you know, 10 minutes a day is all I need in.

Yeah, I remember making fun of the stick.

When you saw that at Marathon Expos 15 years ago, people were rubbing their bodies like it was like, like they were trying to get off. You know what I mean? It's like so fast and furious. Like, come on, man, slow down, take your time.

That was like, we got to do this like the day before the marathon or something like that. Some kind of magic rolling. Well, but man, was it ever right with that?

Yeah, well, back then was that. And that was the rope. Did you get the rope also?

I did not get the rope.

You did.

Yes, absolutely.

The rope guys.

So, rest and recovery, weight, strength and nutrition. And if you didn't just like smack me in the face at age 38 here with things that I need to start worrying about.

But these are the things we've been talking on our podcast about day in, day out, week in, week out about the one percenters, right, Chris?

It's true, but it just becomes table stakes, you know? When you're 25, it's not table stakes. But when you're 35 and 45, it's table stakes.

Well, you can't even play in the game.

So that's the difference. But let's drill into these a little bit more. And first, before we get to rest and recovery, particularly I want to talk about kind of training volume and speed workouts, particularly and how those evolve so that you can get the recovery you need. So let's start with overall volume. From a mileage standpoint, a pure mileage standpoint, does that need to change as you age or how does that evolve?

I don't think so. Steve knows that I'm super low volume, but I mean, I have gone lower only because I can't do as much. And so I have to...

But let's give our listeners a little perspective, just give them a little history. Carmen's highest weekly mileage of all time is 59 miles in one week.

How do you know that?

And she said something to the effect of, because I remember you and I have had many, many conversations. Perhaps you thought I was completely obliterated drunk during the time, but my memory is actually a little better than people give me credit for. But I do know that your sweet spot really was about 45 to 55 miles a week. I remember running with you at times where it seemed like you could run, and even in your 40s you could just hammer away two quality workouts a week consistently and get done what you needed to get done. But I was running 70, 80 miles a week at the same time, and both you and Ricardo were like, maybe that's not right for you, because I think you guys thought I should have been at 65, and now I would agree that my sweet spot as an athlete was 65 miles a week, and I was trying to run more than I really needed to at that time for where I was at. But I just wanted our listeners to know, Carmen's coming at this from, I do believe you would agree with the statement, miles matter, though, that you've got to run miles, you've got to do the work, but for each person it will be a little bit different.

Yeah, and I think, Chris, I think if we go back to, if you have been a high-volume person, you can stay higher. I mean, higher than the non-high volume. So let me say, for example, yes, Steve is right, one week I hit 59. And I remember a friend of mine going, and you didn't go out and run that extra mile to hit 60.

Yeah, they don't know you very well.

No, but I wasn't running marathons. And that was good enough for me for a half marathon or a 10-mileer. But yeah, my sweet spot was 48 to 55. I could put two, two and a half hard workouts a week and just not even blink. One day off, I always took one day off. That's one of the things that I think I'm different than most people all my life. One day off, of course, now is more than that. But even when I was training super hard, I needed that mental break on one day a week. And I forgot what you were asking. Oh, yeah.

So where are you now? If you were at 45 to 50 most of the time, where are you at now?

So right now, up to, so let me go back a little bit for between 45 to 51, 52, which was another like big gap for me, big break. I probably was averaging a high of 48, 49. So at that at that point, so I was still there. But then then it was a big come down. So now I'm probably I call a really good week 30, but I'm doing five days a week and one one cross cross train day and one of day. But I am doing probably three more hours a week of strength training. So it's still a lot of work, but it's about 30. And I want to get to 35. So 35 versus what my max was, let's say 50. It's really not that much of a drop to 25 years late, 20 years later.

Right.

So if you do the math of somebody who has been doing 80, 100.

And you're replacing some of that volume with cross-training.

Yeah, and I do, yeah.

No joke when she's cross-trains seriously, like hour, hour and a half. It's extended, lots of time in the weight room. And you've been doing that since I've known you since the early 90s. You've been very serious about being in the weight room, especially since about 99 or 2000, you've been really, really serious in the weight room.

Yeah, yeah. I mean, I don't get big, so.

No, yeah. She's got guns. You should see her.

So, but you're saying volume can come, maybe coming down a little bit, but not crazy. What about you, Steven? You have a range of athletes in your group. What do you see as the...

I think the huge thing with this is where they're at. For me, most of my athletes are not athletes that have competed or trained as consistently as hard as Carmen has. So, as we talked about earlier, they're just able to handle more load because they don't have so many years of load. We had to be very careful to build them up and slowly get them to where they need to be, but once we get them two, three years in my program, I keep... If somebody's sweet spot is 100 miles a week and they're 65, 60 years old, 55, 60 years old, I might have them still run 100 miles a week. That's probably high. I don't know that there's anybody that I have in that case, but I can consider a scenario where that might be the case. Probably the biggest issue that I have with my athletes that are aging, the venerable James Allen, who I've now coached for about 10 years, and he's been running for a very, very long time, one of the things we realized with him is that we just, we just absolutely had to take one extra drop week. He couldn't, he had to pick his shots, and a lot of times what we would do is not necessarily do the quality workout for that week, perhaps, but we would do the easier medium long run that we have that Team Rogue does on every week, and he would try to stay up with people that were a little faster than him on that, so we could extend, we did a lot more threshold running, basically, because I seemed to get more, he would not break down from it. He also has some hamstring issues, so anytime we would try to do anything below 10K pace, even at 10K pace, we would just end up running into problems that were just, he's a person who's been running for 35, 40 years. So that was a different scenario, but mostly what I do is not adjust volume, I adjust what they're doing on a quality basis and what their recovery is.

And here's the variation on that question, because I think about it for myself, I've been training relatively consistently for 18 years. Not all hard, I had six or so years in early childhood for my kids where I wasn't able to do as much work. So about 12 years of hard training, but a lot of volume during that time. And I've done 90, 100-mile weeks. I know that my body can handle that, but I also know now that I have 18 years of aerobic development and then you add in 15 years of soccer, aerobic development, my aerobic system is pretty damn developed.

Well, I also think that's part of the point with Carmen, who maybe the sweet spot was 55 to 50. She can get away with 35 and still extract a lot from that because of the sort of, what is it, investment terms? I mean, she's basically getting her, she's accrued so much interest, she's accrued so much benefit from all those years of work that she's done that it doesn't take as much. I always tell an athlete that's run 60, 70, 80-mile weeks and then they take a little bit of a break, we go into a 5K, 10K phase and they're all freaked out that they have to drop to 65 miles a week during the 5K, 10K phase. And I'm like, this is the best thing you can do, you're actually not gonna get slower, you're gonna get faster. And we can come back to that longer, slower stuff when we need to, but it's really good for you to shift gears and change gears and to lower that volume for a bit. So some of that is phasing, right, as we've talked about before, Chris, and some of it is just as you age, it makes sense to be careful because the biggest, most, the worst case scenario is to get hurt. Because if you get hurt, you're out for six weeks, eight weeks, and for people who are older, those injuries linger longer. They stay a problem for a longer period of time. You know, young people, when they get stress reactions and stress fractures, you're like, six weeks, eight weeks, you're out. You come back, they're like my dog when he broke its leg. I mean, two days later, after they let her out of a crate, she's sprinting at full blast. And I'm like, okay, well, how come all these young athletes can't do that but a dog can? They probably could, but they're scared to death to do it. But somebody who's over 40 years old cannot just jump back out and get after it. They have to be very careful and very strategic about how they come back.

Yeah, but the overall point is, if you have a long history of Rogue Reveal, you don't necessarily have to keep your volume as high as you used to because you've got money in the bank, so to speak.

I believe that's true, but I don't think people, psychologically, I don't think they can do it.

You have to be very careful how you play that.

Yeah, because I probably have done very little mileage, but if you add my mileage for the 40 years that I've been running, it's probably more than people that run 100 miles for a year and then nothing for two years because they got hurt or something like that. But the other thing, so if you look at the volume and the versus intensity and all that, if you look at the three variables, which is intensity, volume and frequency, and then you just kind of play with those three, then you can start figuring a lot of stuff out. So intensity is the other one. But so if you do a lot of volume, you can't do a lot of intensity as you get older or younger. But you still have to, but you can still work as hard. It's hard. I mean, I think I'm working just as hard as I did when I was younger when I do. When I go out to the track, it's just as hard. So I don't feel that I'm lost, except for the speed.

So speaking of speed in the track, what kinds of workouts or speed workouts are you looking at for your athletes that are over, that are Masters age? So do you change any variables in there? If you're trying to do a 5K workout, are you changing the volume they're doing of interval? Are you changing the recovery? Are you changing the sheer quantity of volume? How do you look at that for an athlete over the age of 40 or 45? Are any of those things changing?

Nope. So I think if I've coached somebody for over about a year, then I know the person, then the workers, and they're gonna tell you, their workers are the same that I did when I was in my 20s. They're the same amount, the same everything. The only thing that changes is their pace because they can't, but the effort is the same. So it's like they're doing 98%, I mean, 95% of the effort, but it's about a minute difference per mile.

So they're slower, but it's the same equivalent workout.

Yeah, and the same recovery period, because I can have the same workout with different goals. And so I can have a 10K workout and then that 10K workout is going to be for picking for a 10K or for a half marathoner. So I just vary a little bit the recovery period, how fast they do it, do they float or they don't, but how hard they do it effort-wise is the same. It hasn't changed.

So we've established that you could do similar volume.

Oh yeah, but the only, what I was going to say is like, you don't change the workout that day, but what I change is if they're in their 40s, they need at least two to two and a half days recovery between hard workouts. So you don't do one on Tuesday and one on Thursday. The Thursday one is going to be like a 70% effort maybe if they want to do that. But when you're in your 50s, then you get like four or five days in between and so on.

Yeah, yeah. So the volume is slightly reduced overall. Speed workout is similar, but recovery, the time between is different. And talk about that. So you said two and a half days at least. And when you say workout to workout, is that track workout to track workout, or track workout to tempo run, or track workout to long run?

Yeah, that's okay. So that's one other thing that it's been super hard. This is the hardest thing for people to adjust that come to my group. And I'm just going to use it as an example, not that it is just good or bad. But I never thought anything of it, of having like a super hard workout on Saturday and then going back and doing a long run on Sunday, because my longer runs were never longer than, I don't know, 10, 12 miles. But mostly, I'm going to say like 70 minutes, whatever that was at the time. And so when a runner comes from another group, and I throw them into that, and so they're doing like a hard workout and then go do your long run, but they're used to 18 miles as a long run. They're just, it's impossible. How can I do that? So it took me like a little bit to realize that, oh my God, those people, they're coming back from a background where their long run is 15, 18 miles. So I had to kind of spread them until they're able to do that, the hard workout and then the long run. At first, they didn't want to lower the mileage, like the volume of the long run. So I let the intensity of the workout on Saturday to take that for them. So after a few months, then they realized, okay, I can handle about 90 minutes.

And just for explanation for our listeners, Carmen has a little bit of an unusual programming in the fact that she does one quality workout during the week and then has a Saturday quality workout and does long runs on Sunday. I think that's one of the magic things of your program is always that your volume is not very high, but you do what we would call two hard days in a sense, what Chris and I would call two hard days back to back, just because you do a quality workout on the track or some other, you do it on the grass, you do it on the track, you do it on the hills, you do a wide variety of things, but you always come back the next day and do a very easy long run of shorter duration than what most people consider a long run. But those days are, they're actually a marriage. They're actually kind of the same workout. They're sort of two parts of the same workout that a lot of people don't understand. You had great success with Cassandra Henkel, who qualified for the Olympic Trials multiple times, with a lot of that kind of program, where she did a long hard workout on a Saturday and then came back with a long run on Sunday, which she, over many years, was prepared for that. But it's a little bit of a different scheduling than what some of our athletes do, but still equally effective. And it sort of gives our listeners an understanding of why a lower volume program might be effective in that system, because you're getting a lot of bang for your buck on both of those two days. And then they're getting a good recuperation and recovery. Your workouts are usually on Wednesday mornings, so your athletes are getting two full days, basically, all days, the rest of the day is Sunday, right? All day Monday, all day Tuesday, and then a Wednesday morning workout. And I just wanted to explain to our listeners who are really adept at understanding. They're not used to that. We're usually Tuesday, Thursday, Saturday, and many of our listeners are paying attention to that.

So as you age, a little bit more time between workouts, where you're focusing on speed, what else from a recovery standpoint do you have to amp up?

You mean recovery between hard work?

Yeah, between hard workouts. Is there something besides the time, just besides waiting longer or adjusting the intensity of that next one if it's going to be too soon?

Oh, yeah. Yeah, I coach most of the athletes and myself very specifically once they have a goal. So yeah, if they don't recover. So I look at how they recover the next day, and if they're hurting, I might extend that to an extra day. So let's say my program right. Now, which I'm like, okay, I would do... This might help a lot. Once I was 40 maybe, I would go on weeks, like Tuesday, Thursday, Saturday, and then the long run. So I had like a normal week for many years. Then that week, I have to extend it to like a week and a half. So I might have my three workouts, but they were within a week and a half. Right now what I'm doing is probably extending that week to two and a half weeks. And I don't care. It just works.

So the same three workouts now done, that used to be done in a week, are down over two and a half weeks.

So if you think about how that slows you down, that's basically what's happening.

Your periodization changes by inserting recovery. And more and more of it as the time goes. Which really follows one of our basic principles, Chris, which is hard days hard, easy days easy. You just need more days easy before you can do your next hard day.

And you're still running in those in between days, just easy running? And then cross training?

Yeah, I use cross training right now one day. If I get any injuries or anything that doesn't seem right, then I do more cross training. And at this point, I don't really mind. I was one person, I told Steve, like 10 years ago would never catch me cross training for I don't know why. But suddenly I started doing that. And it's like, well, this is helping me recover. And I can do more work that way. And I recover.

So you're probably still doing aerobically your 50 miles a week. You've just 35 on the ground and another 10 to 15 in elliptical. What are you doing? Are you doing elliptical? Are you doing aqua jogging? What are your favorite cross training? And our listeners knowing that we're not talking about weight training. Weight training is a different day. That's not the same as cross training. So what other activities are you doing to help your aerobic development?

I'm just doing bicycle, but indoors right now. So if we go outdoors, I don't really, I don't think I get much out of it. I just go for, I can go for three hours. I get the aerobic. So I go for three hours, but it's not very hard. I just have no power to go that hard. So I don't think, I mean, I think my heart can take it. So I don't get much out of it, but my legs can't do it. So I can't go there very fast, but still the work is there. So on the bike at the gym. So if it's a 40 minute day jog for me, but I'm gonna go on the bike, then I double that. So I go an hour 20, just because. And then aqua jogging, I can go pretty hard. As you know, we used to do it.

Yeah, she said aqua jogging is, you are a aqua jogging champion. If there was an aqua jogging Olympics, I think Carmen would probably be a gold medalist.

I can get my heart rate up there easily.

And you use the belt or no belt?

I use the belt, yeah. Yeah, because I want form, like good running form. And then I started kind of getting on the elliptical, which was really hard at first, but I'm kind of getting the hang of it. And I found that you can go, you can do mile repeats there faster, as fast as when you were younger, although it's probably not the... But I can...

There's no load, but you're able to get that kind of... You're getting your cardiovascular system in the same distress that you did when you were younger.

It's strange. I don't like it too much, but I'm going to use it a little more.

But the point for listeners is you're taking extra days. That doesn't mean days of doing nothing. That means days of doing aerobic work, cross-training or easy running in between so that you recover for that next workout. Let's talk about sleep. There are rumors that sleep becomes more difficult as you age, but we all know how important it is as probably the number one recovery tool. How does that evolve?

I don't have much trouble sleeping. I mean, I have trouble falling asleep, but if Ricardo is a testament of getting older and losing sleep, it's not. I mean, he falls asleep in one second and wakes up. He can wake up 15 hours later or two hours later.

He doesn't have old man's disease.

No, no, no. I mean, so I don't know. But for me, if I had a hard day's training and just everything is going well, I have no problems. I have no problem sleeping. You know, if you start having stress of any kind, then it is just, it's a little harder. But I really find it that if I don't sleep, I can do away with one day of like, you know, four or five hours if something happened. But two days in a row, I can feel it. And not just running, I mean.

And you guys have taken, you're the first people that made me realize how crucial sleep was. So even in your heyday, Saturdays were get up early, do a workout, sometimes get up early, sometimes do it in the afternoon, evening, when the weather was nice. But the weekends were for sleeping and relaxing. It was not for going out and shopping and doing other things. If you were in the Troncoso house, I got to live with them for a while. It was like hibernation. Especially as you got closer and closer to big races, it would be more and more and more sleep.

But that's unrealistic if you have kids, if you have, you know. There's a lot of things. The only reason I have to work out early on Saturdays is because I have to coach. To me, it's amazing that if it's cold and it's darker and I go, okay, can we meet at eight today? Instead of, you know, and I get half the group is like, oh, can we do it at 6.30? I'm like, oh, god. So, but that's the reason it's not there.

So, sleep is still important, just as important.

Eight hours, nine hours. But I know it's unrealistic, but as much as you can.

Well, I mean, theoretically, as you age, it should get more realistic because hopefully the kids are starting to move on or out of the house or they're able to do their own thing. You know, my hope is that in seven years when I'm 45, I can take more naps than I do now.

Oh, yeah.

So, let's talk about strength training. We obviously mentioned that losing muscle mass is a big deal and that really if you're going to start to combat the strength reduction that comes with age is that you got to start when you're 35 and not 45. But what does that look like? Does it look like it would when you're in your 20s or is it different?

For me, it does. It does look the same, but it doesn't have to be the same for everybody. I mean, I just was lucky because I was working at The Hills, which was a... I was working for a doctor that owned The Hills. So, I had the gym right there. So, I would go work out before work. And it was very easy. But you don't have to have a gym. You don't have to... You can do... I was just reading one article on that, and it said, just go and do gym... What we used to do, college stagness when we were kids. So, the cruise workout that we used to do is just jumping jacks, that kind of thing.

Burpees, jumping jacks.

Which is basically...

Mountain climbers, those kinds of things.

Basically, like crossfit, but they're just bringing back all that. Like we used to do a lot of that. Now, you don't need a lot of weight to stay. It's just the fact that you are jumping up and down, and you're doing, you know, just lifting, stressing the muscle a little bit. So, if you're going to be on a machine, if I'm on a machine, what I do is just try to get fatigued. But I also figured it into the, you know, getting older part of it. You know, I don't want to get completely fatigued if I have a hard workout the next day, and I want to do okay on it. So, but I just do basically the same things that I used to do. And I go back to doing plyometrics now, believe it or not.

Basic body weight stuff. And plyo, where you're doing jumping and more dynamic movement and strength. How do you do that without getting hurt as you age? Because I know that's a big risk factor when you start doing plyometrics.

Yeah. I don't have my runners do that much because I need to be like, supervising. But I also, for me, because I used to do it intensely when I was running well. So I went back to thinking, what are the things that I was doing in my mid-30s when I was doing the best? And one of them was that. As you get older, you start kind of running. I just noticed the people running towards the ground instead of bounding, like when you're younger. So what's going on there? So I figured it's probably, it's just that reflex movement of touching the ground and rebounding from there, getting energy from the ground. And so that has to be all your muscles working at once, like in an instant, and propelling you for the next step. So if you don't practice that, you're not gonna, you're gonna get slower and slower.

What about jump rope?

Oh, yeah. I mean, I could... Yes. In fact, you know, instead of doing plyometrics, I would say just start with jumping rope. Start with 30 minutes, like reps of 30, sorry, 30 seconds. And work up to an hour. No, no, no, start with like 30 second, you know, intervals, just like we do... So we had this workout that Steve probably did before, the cruise workout.

Many times.

So we do like, you know, 30 seconds jumping jacks, then you sprint 100.

So it's straights and curves, basically, but instead of the curves, it's straight, straight, straight, all four, 100 meter sprints with a plyometric slash calisthenic exercise.

So you're doing a circuit, essentially.

It's a circuit with 100 meter, and this is how we started the season, and it ends after, what is it, two laps? You do 800 of interval work, and then you do an 800 meter interval. As hard as you can. That was the monster.

But you'd be amazed how easily, after like 100 yards, you go, oh my god, what, so...

Because your muscles are firing, everything's on.

Yeah, and you would really hurt the first 100, and then you'd start feeling good, and then the last 100, you'd really start hurting too, because you're running... A hard eight is, period, hard.

Yeah, but it is much easier... Not easy. But it's like... It really helps you believe that you can actually sprint in the middle of a race.

And the history of that workout is Joaquin Cruz used to do that. His coach, Teo Rivera, believed in a lot. He was the great Brazilian 800-meter runner who ran at the University of Oregon and was an Olympic gold medalist and a world record holder and was the greatest 800-meter runner of his time. And he did a lot of fast running and a lot of what we would call drills, calisthenics, and a lot of bounding, a lot of that kind of work.

So basic bodyweight stuff, some dynamic strength movements if you can, but you gotta be careful about the plyometrics. Jump rope. I've been thinking about adding that to my routine because that's something that I feel like that elastic energy, that ability to kind of pop off the ground and move quickly from stride to stride I think is really important. You mentioned flexibility becomes important too. Dynamic stretching. What would you include there as things to think about?

Well, I think that dynamic stretching is basically what we were talking about. The jumping, a little bit of jumping jacks and that stuff before you start a workout. Not necessarily like every single, every run, but I do a lot of times in my easy runs, stop halfway and do five minutes of, you know, not jumping jacks, but things like that. Like jumping jacks, like squats.

You always did lots of drills. A skips, B skips, sweeps, karaoke.

So the drills help you a lot with continuing, you know, being able to, to fire the same, because you're using, you're doing, the drills mimic whatever it is you're doing on your running. Right, just breaking down that movement.

I'll do drills on my easy, whenever I'm doing doubles, I'll do drills on the second run of the day. Three miles, you know, mile and a half, two drills in the middle, mile and a half to finish. The running can be as easy, I feel like I need to go. And the drills kind of turn the lights back on. Interesting. But you're not doing any static stretching?

I don't do much. I do at the end of my day, when I do the foam rolling, I do a little bit, but not a lot. Mostly because I'm really bad at it. Like I'm just, so I feel like I'm...

Hurting yourself more if you do it.

Yes, yes. So I just do enough, I mean, I do open my hips a lot and my hip flexors and then the back. And that's kind of enough for me. But I do have heard, and I'm not an expert on this, that it's better to do dynamic than do the static ones. But I'm not gonna swear on that, I don't know.

So similar overall volume, similar speed work, but more time between workouts. Amp up your strength work. Add more dynamic movement, mobility into routine. And as you mentioned at the beginning, really think about cleaning up your diet. For me, it happened when I was 30. I went from being that trash compactor person to then having to start thinking about it. It only seems to be getting worse every year since then, to the point now where I'm like, man, I've really got to do something about nutrition.

Wait till you get older.

So anyway, I hear that a little bit clear, but it's hard for me.

And the women also, we haven't even discussed specific aging issues with women. Maybe we'll have to have you on another time to talk sort of that transition that happens with women that I'm sure they have a lot of questions about.

That M-word.

Yes, that M-word that my partner currently has finished, just experienced, and I know that from Ruth's perspective, she said to me, you need to ask Carmen about all these questions. I said we're probably going to have to have her on for another session because those concerns are, I mean, we could take an hour easily on some of those issues.

And a pause episode?

Yes, yes. Or women's running with a, another women's running episode with that as a discussion.

I think that's definitely another topic, because I have one last question, and that relates to racing. We talked about kind of having a 12-year period to continue. Maybe you can stretch that if you do some of these things we've talked about. Depending on when you start, you can get faster. But what about racing in general? Should you be racing less, you know, fewer marathons, changing your distances a little bit? How should you think about racing as a Masters athlete?

I think, okay, so I try to race every six weeks. It hasn't happened in the last two years just because different things. Maybe nothing to do, not much to do with running, but like just life in general. So I love racing. So I would race not every weekend, let's say, but I would race every month. And when I was younger, I raced more. But my recommendation would be race as much as you can as long as you're recovering from it. So I do give myself, after a race, a period of no matter what, take a break, even if I feel great, because a lot of people feel great after a race, and they had a plan of resting a couple of days, and they don't. They just go back into their training. Just stick to your, you know, recover, because your body needs to recover. And then start training again, and once you feel like you can race again, go ahead and do it. But I did read, well, I was preparing for this, I read something that was kind of sweet for me, because it said that even for a marathoner, they recommend, a couple of coaches, elite coaches said, I recommend marathoners to train, to race as many 5Ks and 8Ks as they can, because it's the ultimate tempo race, it's the ultimate VO2 max. And it is hard because...

We've been talking about it, Carmen.

We talk about it all the time. I have two reasons for it. Number one is that many adult marathoners cannot, they don't have the background of being, you know, 800 meter, 1500 meter, 5K runners. And so they're not particularly adept at doing that kind of work. So when I say we're going to do 12 times 200 at 5K pace, like usually with those athletes, you're putting the bit and bridle on them, trying to slow them down. And my athletes, they cannot go fast, and they cannot get it turned over. You know, you do 500 meters reps at 5K pace, and it blows their mind, and they just are terrible at it. But they seem to be much better if you throw them into a race. And so they're able to get much more out of that than they would otherwise. And the second thing is I truly believe the 5K and the marathon are sister races. They are, you go through the same peaks and valleys, the same lots of questions that happen. What happens in a 5K plays out in a much shorter, compact, immediate 15 minute or 20 minute or 25 minute window rather than the two hour, two and a half hour, three hour, four hour window, but the same sort of journey happens just shorter and I think athletes that practice that and get used to it, they are much less stressed when it comes to marathoning. So I kind of, I've noticed that over the years, it's wow, they are racing it exactly the same way. They are going through the same experiences. If they go out too fast, they are dead. It's over. You know, if you go out too fast in a 5K, if you are fucking cooked, it's over. You might as well just jog it in. Same thing in a marathon.

Awesome. So still race, but just give yourself time to recover.

Yeah, I don't know about the marathon. I mean, if I told you my, I would say one marathon a year, but that's just because I want people to do everything, to do everything between marathons, like to improve on everything before marathons, between marathons. But I don't know.

Preach it, sister.

Keep preaching on. We keep trying to get them.

I thought I was going to get some.

No, we believe that. It's just very hard with our population. They just want to run another marathon right away, and they're marathon-centric. That's part of the reason we created this podcast in the first place, was to get people excited about the sport, watching the 1500 meters and the 5Ks and the 3Ks and the 10Ks, but also getting themselves out there and realizing a true periodized plan is not marathon after marathon after marathon, but going through phases and different pacing phases.

You can only be your best marathoner if you're working all parts of the range.

That means racing and targeting.

If you drop your 10K by a minute or two, which is very doable for a lot of these runners, you right there, you already did what, two, eight minutes in the marathon? And I wouldn't be able to do, I wouldn't equate that to, you know, for me, because I would have to do all the mileage, but those guys have so much mileage that it would just be a matter of just getting them back on the road.

So true. It's funny because people get, when I talk to them about training for something besides a marathon, they get really scared. They think, well, if I run a 5K for a while, then I won't be as good at the marathon somehow because they missed the marathon cycle. But I always have to stress that you only get better at the marathon if you get better at the 5K or 10K and half as well. So you got to work all those parts of the range.

And you don't lose everything. That's what I tell my few marathoners. You really don't lose everything that you already gained that year training for the marathon. It's just that you're putting it on hold a little bit. Unless you get injured and have to take time off. But if you don't get injured, you just continue with training other systems. It's there. It would be much harder for me to be able to do that.

And you want to talk about longevity. I think that's a key to longevity. For me, as somebody who's basically done one marathon a year my entire running career of 18 years, I don't think I would be where I am now if I was doing two or three marathons a year. But the fact that I've done one marathon a year, done other distances, I've run more 10Ks than I have marathons, more half marathons than I have marathons, not as many 5Ks. I've got to work on that, Steve. Anyway, but I think that's a part of longevity, is doing different distances helps you extend your career.

Absolutely. Another thing that worries me, now that we're talking about extending careers, is never in my career have I had as many runners running as much high mileage right now than I do now. I've got a lot of runners running in that 85-plus mileage per week range, and these are people who have families. It's very impressive to me as well, but one of the things I'm really worried about is that I cannot convince them to not go over 20 miles. They want to go 20 miles nearly every weekend, and it's a really big worry for me. I don't know the real answer, but my gut is telling me, because I haven't had that many people do it, usually I'm pushing my athletes to run a 20-mile run. Now I'm actually saying, no, I don't know how many 20-miles we have in us in a year or a two-year or a five-year window. Let's not spend all our money right now. Let's save some of it. Let's run a 16- or 18-mile run, because we can do a lot of other different things in those paces. Anyway, we'd love to hear your vision that way. It solidifies what our thinking is, and also makes us realize you can be really good not necessarily having to maximize the amount of miles you run.

For people that train for a lot of marathons, or just marathons, and I have a couple of them that go for two or three marathons a year. I try to push two, but it's just hard because it's hard as a coach to get them to be better. They can do them. I have no doubt they can just run them.

But they want to PR at everyone.

To get better, you have to change the system. But one way to do it would be if you're doing just one, is have them do a lot of this as a 20 milers up to, I don't know what it is. For me, it would be about a 20 to 22 mile runs much early, like six months out. And then drop it and use that to raise a good half marathon, 10 milers, something like that, a couple of races with a lot of intensity, 10K intensity, and then bring it up again.

And then come back.

Yeah, bring it up again, but then you can stretch that into, you don't have to do it every weekend, then you can have a lot of hard work, the ones that you do that are great, but they're very hard to do when the runners are also doing, trying to increase their mileage at the same time that they're doing all that, so they don't get the full benefit of it. But if you can stretch the whole thing, you can.

It's a great point because most programs are built with the mileage getting bigger as you go, and you'll, if you pull a marathon program off the internet, your peak mileage is going to be four weeks out from the marathon.

I know.

Which is really, frankly, backwards. It should be five months out. Then you bring it down to add the intensity, and then you might get close to there again as you get to the very end just because of feel. Your long runs are there and so forth, and all of it's coming back together.

Mentally, you want to have that.

Yes, you want to have those mentally. You want the feel to be right.

But both programs are backwards in a sense in that way, where their biggest milers are just right before the race. That may be another topic, Steve, as we get to our prep for CIM build, which we've talked about. Anyway, we're done on time for today. Thank you, Carmen, for joining us. That was fascinating. You're welcome. Lots of good meat in there for everybody who's listening, and hopefully that satisfied your questions about Masters training. But if you have others, please do send them to us, because this is probably worthy of having Carmen back on.

Yeah, we should do a question and answer. Get the best questions and bring her on.

So you can reach me at chris at roguerunning.com if you have questions on this topic. Otherwise, thanks for listening to episode 63. You can check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Instagram, Twitter, or Facebook at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.