Hey everybody, welcome to episode 187 of the Running Rogue Podcast. This is your host, Chris, coming to you from Austin, Texas on a beautiful day here in the city of Austin. I've got a guest today for my conversation, and we'll be talking about running as a pathway to truth with my good friend and many time guest on the show, James Dodds. This is a conversation that I've been contemplating a lot about recently because one of the things that I think running has done for me, not just now during this time over the last few months of one, contemplating the global pandemic, and then two, asking myself big questions about racism and social injustice. I think running has been a place for me to pause, to reflect, and to seek truth as I navigate some of these topics and conversations. And above and beyond that, it has also been an activity that I think because I do it to push my limits and because I'm willing to, like many others, put myself out there in a race, go for big goals, strive hard in this journey to become a better runner as well as better person. I think that process creates a sharpening in you that reveals truth, that reveals insight, that ultimately again makes you a faster runner, but also makes you a better person. And if you happen to do it with other people, if you have a community in which to do it, then I think that learning experience of finding truth can be even richer because then you get friends who can help you reflect on these lessons as they come. And so I've been thinking about this big question of running and how it's a pathway to truth. And so I posed that question to my friend James Dodds, and we had a conversation about it a few weeks ago. I wanted to share that conversation now because I think, again, because I think it's important in the context that we're in in light of the recent episodes I've had talking about racism is this idea of thinking about your own running and trying to reflect on the lessons it has taught you, the truth it has taught you through the years, and let it continue to provide those things to you, especially even now, as it can be a way to reflect, to pause, to use your time on the road now, to dig into yourself, to be a part of this process of looking in the mirror and learning and growing. And so I wanted to have that conversation. I think it's important now. And so here is a conversation that I had with James Dodds on it. And as a part of that, I'll start with what I think is one of the first steps. Really the first step of that in the context of these conversations now is taking a hard look in the mirror. And I think running always provides a pathway to that, but I think it could also provide a unique pathway to that now as we all try to understand, especially those implicit, maybe subconscious biases that exist in us so that we can all be better humans and better support each other, as well as of course the black community and the people of color in our worlds. So I'm gonna stop there. Get some of your thoughts. I suspect you've been thinking about the philosophy behind this question, as well as some of these big topics this week, and would love to just get some thoughts and reactions.

Yeah, there were three that really, when you teed up the conversation last week, that kind of sprang to mind. And two of them are connected. I would say like with training in general, I think early in my running, this idea of running being a pathway to truth, while I may not have used those words, I would say it gave me those early running experiences or memories of those early running experiences of, it was like a litmus test or a pathway to truth in the sense of it showed me my limitations. I think the beginning of a ramp, when I first wanted to run a marathon and moving up to 10 miles felt pretty smooth. And then going to the 12 and 14 mile distance, even 16 for the first time, felt challenging, but pretty doable. And then 18 to 24 just felt like a slap in the face, like, oh my gosh, did I, what did I sign up for? And am I capable of this? And I started realizing certain limitations in myself. I think the first two mile time trial I ever did, I probably had a minute slower on my second mile than my first. And I was like, oh, wow, I think a lot more highly of myself than maybe I deserve. So I'm laughing there because I'm gonna lead this to a good space, but I think it was good to bump up against my limitations. I hope no one laughs at me, but I have read the book, The Way of the Superior Man. And I remember a section in that book talking about living at your edge, not living too far beyond it, because I think when we try to go way beyond our limitations, then we're going to fall flat on our face. We're going to be in a constant state of exhaustion. We're going to be in a constant state of frustration. But also to fall too short of your limitations, to not bump up against them and constantly try to push ourselves forward will leave us in a state of numbness or maybe even melancholy, because you would feel like a lack of purpose. But basically the concept in the book, and it can be applied to all people, it just happens to be a book about working on yourself as a man. And that's that you have to find your edges of who you are, whether it's in thinking, whether it's in the ability to love someone, whether it's in physical fitness. I think physical fitness and running specifically is this space that's so tangible, but because you're using the full body, the mind, the spirit, that you can take the lesson, turn it into a concept and apply it to other parts of your life. So I would say being exposed to these harder distances and then harder paces at harder distances helped me realize certain limitations that were healthy to grapple with so that I could live where I'm currently at and try to grow from there. And then the second one that came to mind was in a sense, it's still about limitations, but it's like flipping it on its head. It also running in this last decade has taught me I'm stronger than I knew. And so it was first interesting to be humbled by this sport. And then some of the newer folks this season may not remember, but I distinctly remember talking about the Dallas Marathon as we launched last season. And I didn't hit my goal, but it was a super hot day. It was a tough go, and I got really close to my goal, which was like 15, 20-minute improvement to where I had been, because it's been about eight years since I PR'd. So just to get back that close to a PR and to put in a season like I did last year and then to overcome certain obstacles, both in my personal life and using running as a constant way to just put one step in front of the other and move forward, it did give me, in a positive sense, a sense of control, a sense of strength, a sense of belief in myself. So I thought of that inverted running, can you lead you toward this path of truth towards your limitations, but also to strength you didn't know you had inside of you. But both of those, I'd say, are outcomes of it leading you to a form of truth, to a reckoning with yourself, a long stare in the mirror. And then the last one that came to mind, and I think this is where you might be able to apply it to the larger scale of these conversations being had just in this time in life, and us seeing the gross side of people. But I'm going to talk about it in running first, and then to a larger life concept. But in running, I would say sometimes we find patterns and routines that maybe worked in our first couple years of running that just no longer serve us. And that came to mind instantly because my best friend says he doesn't do New Year's resolutions, but he does like to each year kind of do mental inventory and ask like, what thoughts or mantras do I live by that no longer serve me? He was a missionary right out of college and lived in a really, really, really hard space in the Sudan. And while he was there with a heart of love and there to serve others, when he came home back to the States after being there for five years, he had like a strong distrust of people and had a belief that the world would take advantage of you if at any given opportunity and that you always had to be on guard about that. While he felt he was here as someone to love people, he felt he also had to 100% of the time be on guard. And he realized after a couple of years of transitioning back and being here that that thought was a false thought. It no longer served him. And I think we see that in running, too, like with certain routines or patterns, like whether it be a weekly mileage set up or a running buddy or, you know, a certain love of a certain brand and shoes as they change them, whatever it may be. There's times where we have to, in our running, kind of go back through the set up, the mental inventory, the approach to the sport and change things up at times because over time, certain things won't serve us. You know, some athletes have even had to switch coaches. I had this conversation at Rogue with my in-person athletes. Like I might serve an athlete for three years extremely well, and it may be time for them to jump over to your group for a couple years or then jump up to Team Rogue for a couple years. And the reverse, too. I've had athletes join me after being five years with another coach. So the three, I guess, bullet points that came to mind when that triggered in my brain, I can't wait to hear your thoughts because I bet you have a completely different angle on it. But that awareness of limitations, that awareness that we're stronger than we are, and that sort of cleaning up of the brain and routines and habits that serve us for a while, and then we have to switch them. And again, that last one, I think, is maybe some of the biases. I had a conversation with a good buddy and your friend, too, Eric Stanley, who we brought up this conversation about racism and him being a kid growing up in a very rural, kind of conservative town where he had friends of color and by no means would have ever been accused of being racist, but just certain biases that he was at a class at UT and a professor talking about how there's these certain biases in your brain and him just having these epiphanies of like, oh man, I don't know that I can fully empathize and I don't know that I've ever been thought for. I don't know if certain jokes are offensive that I think are innocent, but to another person who's dealt with prejudice all their life, there's just a greater level of awareness that was brought to his attention in this class. And he was reminded of all that during circumstances now. So that whole mental inventory, I think, is an interesting one that comes to mind.

What do you think in this? I'm going to ask this question. You don't have to answer, because I'll answer it first. So you can think about it while I answer, because I think it's a deep question. And this has been the center of my pondering over the last week since we teed up this topic. But the question is, what's the most important or profound thing you've learned about yourself because of running? And so that's been one of the things I've been pondering this week, especially with the backdrop of everything that's happening. And I don't think there's a perfect answer to this question. I think I've learned a lot of things about myself through my running journey. But the thing that I kept coming back to in my head this week is this idea of being comfortable, learning to be comfortable being uncomfortable. And that at least has been the thing that's come back to me because I think there are so many parallels in other parts of life. Running has taught me to be more comfortable being uncomfortable. And I think that has pushed me to growth in areas that extend well beyond. So I think about, for example, I was thinking about the start of my last two time trials. So I did the Front Door 5K last Saturday, which was three weeks after we did our time trial there together on the track. And then that same week, a few days prior, I did a one-mile time trial flat on a flat section of paved trail that Jason and Mallory teed up for us in the Vagabond time trial. So Thursday, one-mile time trial. Saturday, 5K time trial. And I did both with my friend Adam, who he's sort of bored to run short and fast, so he kind of thrives and loves it. He also is always up for doing it with me if I tell him to, and that's what our friend's for. But before both of those time trials, I remember hesitating at the beginning. We did our warm-up, we did our drills, and then we'd go to where we were going to start, and I would just hesitate, kind of walk around for a second, trying to gear myself up mentally for the pain that was about to come. And I remember in both circumstances telling him, I said, I hate this. I hate this because I feel like I know the pain is going to come, and yet I'm going to do it anyway. And so I would always take a beat, like walk a little circle before, and then we would go. And of course, once I get into it, I may not be perfect about managing the pain, but I feel like I'm pretty good at it, and I've gotten better at it over time. But you quickly get into a dark place in both a mile or a 5K time trial because that's how they are. And then you just have to be there and work through it. And it's, you know, in the mile, I ran 5.27 times the 5K at 18.07 this time. And so, you know, that's 23-plus minutes of being on the edge where you're suffering and just having to constantly deal with that mental focus in order to try to stay on it and not pull back. And I've gotten good at that because of the act of just doing it over and over again for the last 20 years of running. But I think in parallel, that translates to in daily life when I have uncomfortable things happen or I face uncomfortable truths or I have to look in the mirror and say, hey, am I handling this the right way? Or somebody gives me feedback that I didn't do this right or I said this thing that may have hurt their feelings. I can face those things, I think, better because of running, because I'm comfortable being uncomfortable. I'm comfortable stepping into a scenario saying, like the podcast I did a few weeks ago with Alex, talking about running and racism, I'm comfortable having those conversations, being uncomfortable in them. And I'm not perfect, I'm not holding myself up here. I'm just saying I'm willing to step into those conversations. I'm willing to take a hard look at myself. And I think I'm better at that because of running, because I'm comfortable being uncomfortable. And there's been a lot of times, especially in these last two weeks, but really broadly in my journey on understanding my own implicit biases, that it's just uncomfortable. Because yes, there are systemic issues in our country and structural issues in this country, as well as overt racism in this country that I was exposed to. As a kid growing up, you know, in a primarily white conservative environment, that I've had to face. And the journey continues for sure, but I'm willing to step into it, and I think I'm more willing and better capable of stepping into those uncomfortable situations because of running. And that kind of seems silly, as I even talk it out loud right now, but I really believe it's true.

It's a great question. As you were talking, my brain started spiraling into, how have I learned to deal with discomfort, et cetera? But to be true to the answer, I think for me, the biggest thing I've learned, honestly, is I put it under the bucket of worthiness, and the one-liner that keeps coming to mind is, I deserve to be here. And so even as I say that, I wasn't even trying to be vulnerable, but I'm realizing, oh, I'm sharing a side of my psyche that most people don't know about. But you know about it. But I think my personality, I've always had a level of talent, whether it be in school, to kind of be in the top 10% window, or in sports, just jack of all trades. So I could always be on the team, but even a captain at different times because of personality, but not having that extra level to be a starter or to be first in my class. So I would always fill a little bit of that gap, and somewhere along the way, I developed just a constant state of imposter syndrome, or sort of a constant thought of not being worthy. Everyone around me was doing it and in it, and they represented, let's say, with marathoning specifically. I had run five marathons, and I was still dealing with the thought of, man, what real marathoners do, or X, Y, and Z, but in my head, I still treated myself as like this. And I wouldn't even say I was aware of it at the time. It's easy to talk about it in hindsight, but it's just I would constantly have this thought of like, man, I'm applying all the concepts that the real runners use, and I'm getting by. But I never let myself be in that bucket of I'm a real runner. And I'd say I ran five marathons, maybe even six before I was going to the grocery store one day, like a normal random weekend grocery run. And, you know, it's during a time where everyone's hating on carbs. And I think even Tim Noakes at the time was changing his thoughts on, like, carbs are, you know, we're switching gears. Runners don't need carbs as much as they... But me walking through, like, the store and still buying my pasta and everything and my brain justifying things, saying... And it was the first time that it came from within. There was this little thought that came in my head of, well, I'm a high-endurance athlete, so I'm gonna buy these things because it's working. And then I was like, wait, did I just... This is like an internal conversation in my head. It was like the first moment, a crystallized, good feeling where it was like, oh, my God, I think of myself as a high-endurance athlete. And it was just this, like, stepping into moment of, like, no, like, I'm here, I deserve to be... I mean, I do this. There's probably someone that runs five miles per week less than me, and 15 seconds slower than me on average, and they're just... They're going fishing for me. They're gonna pass me, and just like I'm fishing for someone else, I'm gonna pass them. And it was this beautiful moment for my own personal confidence that I've since applied at work and other aspects of my life, even dating. When you know... In work, imposter syndrome is like a great application, but when I first moved into tech and I wanted to be a client partner, I worked so hard the first year of that job where I was like, oh my God, I don't know anything about sports business. I don't know anything about marketing, and I definitely don't know anything about technology. And I joined a sports marketing tech firm that serves people, and we even consult now. I'm the guy now, four years later, in calls telling NFL teams and vice presidents of partnerships how to create new forms of digital inventory to sell to their partners and earn an extra 10% on their annual contracts. And I'm not just teaching them how to use the software, but I'm giving them advice on how to build a narrative and how to position themselves because we can benchmark against other teams. And in the same fashion that Running helped me have that first epiphany of I deserve to be here, I would say I used marathoning in that first year and a half of just trying to not get booted from the company. I couldn't have gotten here where I am in a senior role at our company without having that worthiness thought in the first year and a half and that grit that I do believe came from running. Because after running 20 marathons, it sunk into my soul. I have staying power. I may not be the best, I may not be the smartest, but I know how to just get out there and grind mile after mile after mile, weekend after weekend after weekend. And this week was a long week, a hard week, a frustrating week, but I know that something's going to change next week because of this week's work. And that same kind of attitude that you develop as a marathon runner bled into my career and I think has given me that truth or that belief or to your question, the greatest lesson I've taken from running is that I deserve to be here and that the work does pay off.

That's pretty powerful, man. To think about the ripple effect of that confidence building that came from a simple act of putting one foot in front of the other, especially in the context of the struggle you had the last couple of years with divorce and so forth. Think about where you would be through that had you not had running. I'm sure you'd be okay. I'm sure you'd figure it out, but it seems like you were more ready, you had more tools to come out stronger in many ways through that tough time because of it.

Yeah, absolutely. And I didn't go that path because I was like, we didn't get to rehearse this, and I was like, I have no idea what I would do if I started going deep into that one. But absolutely, it applies there too. And I was thinking it as I was talking about the career piece, I was like, I'm with you. I mean, in some ways, I don't know how I would have made it through that experience. But I will say not only the mental framework that I've learned from running helped me through that, but also running itself helped me through that in that, you know, my anchor point, like I went topsy-turvy where I was disoriented in life and felt no connection to it. But I was like, you know what? Tuesday, I'm at Rogue at 5.30, and Wednesday night, I'm at Rogue, and I will coach at 6 p.m. And Thursday morning, I'm at Rogue at 5.30, and Saturday morning, I'm at Rogue at 6 a.m., and I will run. And those were, it was like moving through life like a kid on a set of monkey bars. It was like swing to Tuesday, swing to Wednesday, swing to Thursday, swing to Saturday. And yeah, I can, so not only the mental framework of what I've learned from running got me through that, but also the actual physical weekly management of just going from one run to the other and having that community at Rogue. There's no way I make it through the last two years and be where I am now without running in my life.

Maybe think of another thing that running I think has given me, which is this ability to connect with people in ways that maybe I wasn't equipped to without it. And that probably kind of goes back really to running and Rogue together, because I think the power of the community is a part of that. But for me, running early on as an introverted person was a solo escape. And that was my time to dig in deep with myself and figure things out, solve the world's problems, de-stress, et cetera. But then when Running and Rogue came into my life, it became a vehicle for connecting me to others that has only grown over the last ten years. And that's not just as an athlete, but as a coach, to the point where now I rarely run alone. And I've learned so much from other people, and my best connections with people have come, and deepest connections have come, because of shared runs, or because of shared experiences via the run, or because of coach-athlete conversations or relationships that have developed, or you just get to a depth of connection, because of this common pursuit that leads you really vulnerable at times, that I wouldn't have developed otherwise. And so it's taught me to be a better connector with people, or to build better connections with people, which is also really powerful. And we're opposites on that front. You're the extrovert who needs other people, and I'm the introvert who sometimes has to hide from them. But I think I'm better for the connections I've created through running, and what that's added to the dimension for me as a human. Lots to think about there.

Yeah, it's a good one.

I think that I would encourage everybody to ask themselves that question, and everybody listening to say, okay, what's the greatest thing that running has done for me or taught me as a human? And hopefully, us reflecting on that has given you some thoughts already. But I love the fact that you and I came at that initial question from completely different angles, because it just represents the fact that everybody is going to have a unique and uniquely powerful answer to that question. So I would encourage everybody to spend some time digging into it, because I think it's just good to reflect, because it shows us that what we're doing is about more than just putting one foot in front of the other. And I also think it makes me relish in some ways those moments of fear. The start line of those two time trials where I was like, I hate this. But I did it anyway, because I knew it was good for me in a sense that I would learn something. And of course, there's also the physical benefits. But it's a way to flip that fear of racing or that fear of a start line on its head, in a sense, by showing you and reflecting on the power, the good that can come from those vulnerable moments that we all have while running. And associate those vulnerable moments, those moments of fear with lessons that have brought good to your life. So I would encourage everybody to dig into that question a little bit if they haven't already. And I hope that ous reflecting on it has given you some thoughts already, but find your own answer to it. So there you go. A short conversation on running as a pathway to truth. And as I mentioned there, I want to leave you with that big question to think about yourself is what's the most profound thing you've learned either about yourself or that you've learned in general because of running? Because I know that every time we line up for a race, especially those long ones, those half marathons and marathons, there is a whole lot of fear that comes on that starting line. But there is also a massive payback in the lessons that we learn out on the road in the middle of the work, in the middle of the pain, in the middle of the suffering that eventually leads to us responding and ultimately getting those goals in spite of those challenges. So dig into that question, think about it, and then use that as fuel to relish in those opportunities to dig deep and find more inside yourself. So with that, as a quick conversation on this Monday, we will wrap the episode. As always, you can check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Twitter, Instagram, or Facebook at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.