Hey, everybody, welcome to episode 370 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung, coming to you from Austin, Texas. Excited about this episode today, which is going to be a little bit of a smorgasbord of topics that have been on my mind and a few listener questions that came in this past week. So we're going to get to a host of things, including talking about some insight and takeaways that I want to share from a conversation that Des and Kara had earlier this week to some listener questions to also I'm going to give some tips for Boston Prep, final Boston Prep for those that are on their way to Boston because that's now just seven weeks out from when I'm recording this episode. So we're going to kind of hit a few different things and hopefully there'll be a little bit of something for everybody in this episode. And so yeah, should be interesting, should be fun, should be short and sweet. Let's start with a comment that Des made on this week's Nobody Asked Us with Des and Kara episode, well, season three, episode five, that Des and Kara were talking about the use of sodium bicarbonate. I think I mentioned this on last week's episode, at least a little bit when I was answering Lee's question about creatine and ketones. And Des made the comment that if you're gonna focus on the 1% and neglect the 99% and I'm paraphrasing, then something's a little bit off. Focus on the 99% first and then you can think about the 1%. And for the elite athlete that is at the very pinnacle of the sport that's been doing the 99% for 10 plus years and they're trying to get that extra 1% to get a world record, then sodium bicarbonate might make sense. But if you're doing sodium bicarbonate as an everyday athlete, but you're not doing the basics of the other 99%, then something is off. And I do think in this day and age of social media, of people latching on to potential magic bullets or magic potions, so to speak, there is a tendency for us to get distracted by the 1% when the 99% matters. And so I did want to give, as we open this episode, just a little bit of a PSA on what is the 99%. And these are things that I've been talking about since the very beginning of this podcast, from episode one on. And if you were to go back to listen, and listen to episode one, then you would see all the themes that I've been talking about now for close to 400 episodes, and those themes are the 99%, making sure, as a starting point, that you're focused on easy, consistent volume as the number one thing, and building that volume consistently over time. Because if you're not running easy, in order to run more volume, and do it in a healthy way, while also building aerobic capacity, then you're wasting your time. You're putting out junk miles for sure. So make sure you've got that easy foundational volume as your starting point. And then from there, you've got to, of course, layer in quality and speed workouts that are periodized in a way that allows you to peak two or three times a year, so that you're not trying to race every weekend or race every month, but rather really putting all your eggs in a handful of races a year to make sure that you can get the most out of yourself, peaking in those opportunities and reaching that max potential at those peaks. And if you're peaking appropriately, then you're also thinking about periodizing appropriately and making sure that you're working through your training in a way that develops the right parts of the system at the right time in order to peak on the days that matter. And along the way, you're also in many ways periodizing within the week, balancing stress and rest so that when you're working hard or going long, you're balancing that with easy recovery days and easy movement to make sure you get that blood flow, which promotes healing, which allows you to go do the next long or hard thing. So you're balancing stress and rest appropriately, and rest in this context being that active movement. You're also prioritizing the other recovery elements, sleep, adequate feeling, and of course, easy movement as we just talked about. And to do all these things the right way, you're building a routine that has days that are individually differentiated by the purpose of those days, where you're mixing in one speed workout a week with one long run a week, with one medium long run a week, two recovery runs to follow those speed workouts and the long run, and then of course, one or two other super easy days to fill it all out so that you can build that volume in a sustainable way. You're also going easy enough when you should be going easy enough, which to use the rule of thumb that we have on this podcast, that means you're going one to two minutes slower than marathon pace on those medium long run days and easy days, and you're going two to three minutes or slower on recovery days to make sure you're getting the right recovery effort. You're also prioritizing that long run, especially in the training for a half and a full marathon, where you're getting plenty of 14 to 16 mile runs for half marathoners and plenty of 20 plus mile runs for marathoners. Of course, building to that point over time, and then you're starting to work in speed work in some of those long runs, perhaps two or three of those long runs per season, so that you can start to apply race specificity to your training as well, working in race pace on tired legs. You're also learning to optimize your fueling along the way, both pre and post, but also in run, so that you're maximizing the potential that you can achieve by fueling appropriately and figuring out the fueling mechanisms that work best for you. You're also hydrating well and thoroughly, particularly with electrolytes, not just during your workouts, but also throughout the day, so that you're well hydrated and you have all the building blocks with H2O to execute on respiration and also rebuild those cells as you need to. You are fueling well, especially post-hard effort, to make sure that you're getting a filling balanced meal after a long run or speed workout, so that you get those building blocks for recovery into the system right away. You're, of course, modulating your speed work in a way that is tailored to the period that you're in, to the strengths and weaknesses that you may need to work on, to the paces that are appropriate for you, training at paces that fit your current fitness versus reaching to try to get to paces that might not yet be there for you. So you're modulating your efforts in the right way and following your intuition along the way to ensure that you're not overextending yourself on the journey to your peak races. You're also tapping into a community to support you, whether that be running buddies to help you get the most out of your training or be most accountable. Or perhaps you're tapping into a coach who can give you that paint by numbers approach to getting your goals. And if you're not necessarily working with structure like that, then perhaps you're using resources that you find online or in a book to help you construct a training plan that makes sense given your goals. You're also working on the mental side of both training and racing, where you've got a defined purpose with the defined set of goals and you've translated that into something that connects to the races that you're targeting. So it's meaningful and powerful to you. And then of course, as it relates to race day, you're executing a mental plan as well as a physical plan with mantras and with a race plan that you can execute optimally so that you get the best result on the day, which means also learning how to appropriately negative split races, especially half marathons and marathons so that you're starting more conservatively and finishing strongly because that is the optimal way to get the most out of yourself on those days. You're also recognizing along the way that you're not going to be perfect at it, that you're going to make mistakes, that you're going to have workouts that are tough or challenging or races that don't go the way you want. And on those days, you're taking your lessons, you're not beating yourself up, you're taking your lessons and you're carrying those to the next thing so that you can continually get better in your journey and you're doing that all with a long-term view. Those are all elements of the 99%. And we could talk about the 1%, yes, and there are pieces in the 1% that are important. And I would consider some of the things I'm going to talk about relative to Boston later in this episode as parts of the 1%. But those aren't things you should be worried too worried about if you haven't done the 99%, the things I just talked about, the bread and butter, the brass tacks, the basic chop wood, carry water of it all, in order to make sure that you get the most out of yourself. So don't lose the 99% because there's a lot of shiny new toys and 1% floating around in our world that can be very, very distracting and can often take our sights off of the things that really matter, the things that are going to get you most of the way to your goal. So don't forget those pieces. And yes, when it's time and when you get to the edges of things, and yeah, absolutely experiment with the 1% and figure out what's going to help you get that incremental gain. But don't neglect even when you're doing that, the rest of it as well. So that's a quick PSA to start. And it was something I was reflecting on after our conversation last week, particularly after answering Lee's question on creatine. So there's that. Now, let's get to a couple of listener questions. And then I want to finish with three things that Boston marathoners should be thinking about in their final seven weeks of prep. Three things that I think are critical to execute particularly well on that day and to face the challenges that Boston brings. So let's get to a couple of listener questions first. Thanks again for those who sent them. I always enjoy getting these questions. And if you want to lob one into me, you can just shoot me an e-mail chris at roguerunning.com. This first one is from Jennifer. She says, I've been listening to your show for a little while now. Coming off the Cowtown Ultra 50K today, I wondered if there are any specific ways that 50K road training differs from marathon training. I was fairly pleased with my time today, but the last few miles were tough, and I'm wondering how I might train differently next time. So good question, Jennifer. And I hope the Cowtown was one that you could be proud of, even if it didn't go exactly the way you wanted. Congrats on getting it done. And for this, I'll differentiate this conversation between 50K trail and 50K road. And first, I'll address 50K road races, because I do think there are unique challenges when you go to the trail that are a little bit different. But to kind of open the answer to this question, we have a phrase around Rogue that we talk about, which is, what does the race require? And how do you think about training for a race to make sure that you can meet the demands of that race? Whether that be a specific course situation, specific distance, specific trail or terrain situation, all of those variables come into play when you're asking yourself, what does the race require? And how is it unique to other comparable things? And for a 50K on the road and a 50K at Cowtown, it's a little bit challenging terrain, at least in parts of that race. And so when I think about a road prep, or prep for a road 50K in this context, I would think about three things. Obviously, there's the increased distance. You're going from 42K to roughly 250K, so you're adding another 8K or roughly five miles to the distance. And then you're also, as a result, adding time to the equation, which has a fueling impact. And I think the longer the race becomes, the more fueling becomes important. The more fueling can cause a negative impact if you get it wrong. And so you really have to dial in fueling, I think, even more as the distance extends or the time extends. So fueling becomes another question and variable. And then the third thing is just terrain-specific. And to what extent do you need to match prep on the terrain for that course so that you're particularly ready? And Cow Town is a race that does have some rolling hills to it that you need to be prepared for, especially as, again, that distance extends. So those would be the things that are unique about Cow Town. But beyond that, it's not that different than actually marathon training. So essentially, what I would look at from a distance standpoint is, what does the race require in order to be prepared to run 31 miles? And it essentially means you need to be ready to run five more miles than the marathon. And so if I were coaching somebody in prep for that, then I would have them add four to five miles to their longest long runs. So I'd have them build up to 24 or 25 mile long runs, easy long runs, in prep. Of course, if you had a specific time goal, then we could talk about perhaps including some pace work in some of those long runs. But beyond that, it's really just about covering the distance and making sure that you're getting 20 plus miles as many times as possible, perhaps as many as five or six times in prep, and that you have a couple of those long runs be 24 or 25 miles in prep as well. I don't think you need to do all of the 20 plus milers in that range, but if I were going to have you do five or six, I would have at least two of them be in that 25 to 26 mile range. So you're actually able to build up to that point. So you might do a couple of 20s, a couple of 22s, and then maybe a couple of 24s. For example, it's a lot of 20 plus mile runs, but if you really want to steal the legs and have them as prepared as possible for the distance, that is the way to do it. So you got to get that time on your feet, and then of course, you've got to make sure you've got nutrition and hydration dialed in. And so I want you to be thinking about doing a sweat test, where you do a one hour run and you weigh yourself before and after. Weight loss during that period in pounds times 16 ounces is the amount of fluid that you're losing over an hour. So if you're losing two pounds in an hour, that's 32 ounces per hour that you're losing. You want to replace about 80% of that in a long effort like this. So if you're losing two pounds per hour, you need to replace about 25 ounces per hour. And then you need to be thinking about, how am I going to be getting in those 25 ounces per hour? Am I doing that through the aid stations on the course? Am I carrying a handheld with me and refilling it? How am I doing that? But program it. You know, you've got plenty of aid stations out there at a race like the Cow Town Ultra. So just make sure you've got it dialed in and you're replacing about 80% of the fluid lost as you go. And then of course, you want to also be getting about 200 calories per hour along the way as well. And what is that coming from? Is that coming from gels? Choose other things. When I was doing ultras, I would take peanut M&Ms, which is about 10 calories per peanut. And I would have 10 peanut M&Ms per hour in my ultras. And I would have another 100 calories in sports drink to top off the 200 calories per hour that I was roughly targeting. And so it becomes just then a math equation. You're figuring out exactly your fluid loss and what you need to replace, and then therefore programming that into your run. And the same thing with calories, programming exactly how you're getting those roughly 200 calories per hour. And that could be two gels, could be peanut M&Ms and Gatorade or Powerade, could be whatever sounds good to you. I was using Nerds Gummy Clusters at the end of the New York City Marathon, and that was working for me. Doesn't really matter where it's coming from, but you want it to be coming from something. And then you just then you just got to go and execute that. And of course, you're going to practice that in your long runs to make sure that you can match it to race day and calibrate up or down if needed. And then that's it. Then you go and execute it. But nutrition, hydration becomes absolutely critical, especially in those last five miles. And if you're underfueled or underhydrated, going into those last five miles, regardless of how ready your legs are, it's going to be a struggle. So make sure you really dial that in and program it. And then the last thing is just that terrain specific prep. So making sure that you're doing your long runs over rolling courses as well to mimic the hills that you might face on race day there in Cowtown. And then perhaps work in rolling hills on some of your medium long runs as well to be prepared for that. Because you will lose your legs from that pounding of the ups and downs if you're not prepared for it in running those things specifically. And I'll also talk specifically about Boston and how I recommend later in this episode how I recommend people prep for the eccentric loading of that course. So that's the last variable, just making sure that you're getting access to terrain that's going to mimic what you're facing on race day so the legs are prepared for that up and down. So those are the three things I'd be worried about and thinking about for the next one. So hopefully, that'll have you more ready to go tackle it the next time. And if we take those principles and correlate that to what it looks like for preparing, if someone were preparing for a trail 50k, then it becomes less about maybe mileage and more about spending time on your feet and also matching the terrain specifically in practice that you're gonna face on race day, as well as the elevation gain that you're gonna face on race day. And then, of course, all the nutrition elements still apply as well. So to me, that's the biggest thing as we extend the distance, is making sure you have specificity on terrain and specificity on nutrition. And then, of course, with a trail 50k, you need to factor in the variable that aid stations aren't necessarily gonna be there every couple of miles, like they might be in a road 50k. So you might have to be thinking about, how can I carry the right amount of food and water for five miles or six miles, or perhaps sometimes even more, to make sure I can get that in over whatever time that's gonna take before I have that opportunity to refill or replenish what I'm carrying. So with trail ultras, it just becomes a little bit more nuanced and complicated, and you have to really study the course and match to the terrain so you know exactly what you're facing out there. But then it largely becomes a math exercise in terms of nutrition and hydration prep, and then it becomes an exercise of trying to mimic those conditions as much as possible, particularly on long runs, as you go out, go throughout your training. And for example, when I was training for my trail 50 miler, that was gonna have 10,000 feet of elevation gain and 10,000 feet of descent on a loop course there in Squamish, British Columbia. And so I was having to try to find long, sustained climbs to practice, not only running up them, but also hiking up them some. And in Austin, we don't really have that on trails here in the flatlands of Texas, but we do have long road stretches. And so the most I could get was a road that gained 400 feet in a mile in West Austin. And so for long runs, I would go run up and down that road to get that vertical change, because while it wasn't on trail, it was still giving me the eccentric loading and the pounding of the downhills. And also, of course, the building strength building of the uphills. So I was at least prepared for that terrain, and my muscles were steeled to it. And then, of course, separately, I would go run rolling or hillier trail routes, even if I couldn't get the same elevation gain. But that would allow me to mimic the terrain so that when I put the two together, where the road climbing with the trail footing and manipulating over similar terrain, then it all came together on race day in a way that actually worked really well. I was really worried about losing my legs or having my quads destroyed because of the elevation gain on that course, but it didn't happen because I was able to mimic that terrain as much as possible, given the resources that I had and the terrain that I had here in Austin. So those are some things to think about when you're thinking about those trail ultras. The next question we had here was from Kelsey, and she asks about weekly mileage. She says, I'm riding with a super silly and maybe overthinking question as a person trying to get out of the boom bust training cycle, training for the race, and then slacking. How do I figure out what my weekly mileage is? Is it an average over the last year, six months, month? If we look at a histogram of my mileage over the last six months, it might include 14 weeks in the 20 to 25 mile range, three weeks of around 15, nine weeks in the five to 10 mile range. This makes it tough to calculate, for example, an increase of 25% mileage for the next training cycle, or even figuring out where to start mileage-wise for my next training cycle. I can increase by 10% each week, but do I start at 15 miles, 20? My peak week was apparently 39 miles last cycle when there were two long runs in the same week, a Saturday and a Sunday, but that can't be right. Clearly, I'm overthinking this as a data scientist, but I do wonder if other people might have the same question. I appreciate your patience. So thank you, Kelsey, for the question. And yes, you probably are overthinking it a little bit, but that's okay. And so let me try to clarify here. And overall, if we're looking at the histogram of your mileage, then we really want to be really raising all of those numbers up, not only working on the tail, those nine weeks in the five to 10 mile range, but also building the 14 weeks in the 20 to 25 mile range. And I'm not counting the week where you had two long runs in the same week because that's just more a data anomaly than anything. But how do we think about it? And to clarify, when I'm talking about that 25% rule, and I think I say more, 20 to 25%, you don't want to increase by that much from the peak in a cycle, not counting the double long run week, to the peak in the next cycle. So if you were hitting a peak of, let's just say 30 miles in one cycle, then I would want you to max the peak in the next cycle at that 36 to 38 miles. So you're looking, in that 20 to 25% rule, you're looking kind of peak to peak. Obviously, then we also have the roughly 10% rule, where I like to say, I like to take percentages out of it, oftentimes when I'm looking from week to week and say, just don't build by more than three to five miles per week. And so those are some ways to think about those two rules. We're looking peak to peak on the overall training cycle progression, and then we're looking to bump weekly mileage not by more than three to five miles. But the biggest challenge, it sounds like, for you, Kelsey, is just making sure that you're not hitting those five to 10 mile weeks in between some sort of racing cycle. So we need to be elevating those as a starting point. Now, how do we do that? Well, it starts by having a routine and a baseline that's going to be something you use as a fallback year round, whether you're in a race or not. And then, of course, when you're in a race-specific cycle, then it only builds and elevates from that. So I would want you to be thinking about what's my baseline medium long run? What's my baseline long run? What's my baseline speed workout day? Even if I'm not doing the speed workout, I get some miles in and I do some easy strides afterwards. And also, what's my baseline recovery run look like? And if you have that and how does it fit together through a week, then you can get a baseline schedule and a baseline mileage level that kind of becomes your home base when you're not in a specific training cycle. And that might look like, let's just say five miles on your medium long run day, five miles on a quality day with strides afterwards, 10 miles for the long run, that's 20. And then a couple of three mile recovery runs, that's three each, so 26 miles for your baseline. Now, if you're not quite at that level, then let's build to that. And then when we go into a training cycle, we'll build up above that, obviously, as we get that long run, perhaps a little bit longer, if we're building to a half, for example, and then perhaps the medium long run, and the quality runs extend as well. So those might build a little bit during a training cycle, and then you taper for that race, you recover from it over a couple of weeks, if it's a half marathon, and over three weeks, if it's a marathon where you might still be running, but obviously, it's just at lower levels, and you're not hitting those targets I just talked about. But then you're going right back to that baseline number, so that you're hitting that 20, 25 miles a week year round, and then you're building off of that from a peak standpoint. And then when you're ramping up for a specific training cycle, then you're thinking about that three to five mile bump that I just talked about from week to week, so that as you build in to a training cycle, you're not violating that rule, but you're not too far off of your peak at any given time because you have that baseline. So figure out what your baseline should look like so that you can always return to that home base after you've recovered from a race, and then you use that to ramp up to your peak. And again, you're not going to increase by more than 25% from training peak to training peak, not counting those double long run weeks, but then the math becomes pretty straightforward. And you have this year round routine that has a baseline outside of recovery weeks and taper weeks that doesn't go below, say, 20 to 25 miles a week. And then you start to build to peaks that are higher than that, maybe starting at 30 for a cycle, going up to 35 or 36 for a cycle, then maybe going to 40 for a cycle, so that you're able to progress that mileage over time, and then at some point perhaps your baseline raises as well once you get to higher peaks. But we've got to pull up the tail of those histograms. Those 5 to 10 mile weeks are significantly hurting you, and if you want to reach your max potential, you're going to find a way to make sure you don't see weeks like that. And that's not to say that year round you're always training, and certainly, you know, there's vacation weeks and weeks where things go wrong or you're sick or whatever. I'm not talking about the exceptions, I'm talking about the baseline rules. And I can very much relate to this question because when I was first started in my journey, I wasn't training for a race specifically or didn't have something on the calendar, then my running would go to zero. And so I might take three months of not running at all and then start training again for a race. Then I'd build for five months that race, I'd race, and I'd not train again for another two or three months. And I realized that especially as I progressed in my running journey, I was significantly hampering my potential because I had to spend so much time rebuilding my fitness. Whereas when I started training at a base level year round, then yes, I had to rebuild fitness for sure. I wasn't sharp year round, but I was so much closer. And when I actually got into a training cycle again, then I could build quickly to where I was before and then go beyond it. And so there's also to me a mental side of this, which is that if you're really serious about reaching your full potential, then you're going to commit to that baseline volume year round. And I would also say that part of what helped me too in that was really thinking about my training in 6 to 18 month windows, so that I could connect cycle to cycle and thinking about what the ultimate goal was. So depending on what your ultimate goal is, whether that's to race a half or a marathon in a certain way, or to race a 5k or 10k in a certain way, what is that? How can you break that down incrementally? And then do training cycles over the course of 12 to 18 months that all point to that bigger goal. So you can start to connect the dots. So it's not just training cycle to training cycle that you're looking, but you're actually looking over a longer term picture so that you can see how it all fits together. And then doing that helped me realize that, hey, these little down months in between where I don't have a race and I'm not maintaining a foundation are really hurting me. And if I can just maintain that foundation, I'll be so much closer the next time I start a cycle. So there's also that planning and mental side that I think is important as well. So hopefully, that's helpful for you, Kelsey, and thank you for the question. All right, those are my questions. And now I want to get to my last bit here, which is to talk about prep for Boston. We are seven weeks out. And there's three things to me that are really, really important about preparing for Boston. There's preparing for the hills. There's preparing for potential heat, which is a variable in what seems like half the years out there. And then of course, there's preparing for the course and the challenge of it overall. So I want to talk about three things that if you're training for Boston, you should be thinking about to make sure that you're as prepared as possible for the race coming up here that third Monday in April. So first, let's talk about preparing for the hills. We've got to prepare for the eccentric loading for the hills. And I think oftentimes when we think about that, we think about having to prepare by running marathon pace on hills, particularly downhills. And while that is certainly a component of your training likely in preparing for this so that you can get the feeling for what it's like to run marathon pace on downhills and uphills and over rolling terrain, you also want to prepare for that eccentric loading. And there's relatively recent science on eccentric preparation that I think is important, which says that if you're running easy on hills, easy on downhills, then it actually prepares you as well as running at pace on downhills. And so one thing I like my runners to think about that are doing Boston or really any downhill race, is adding hill training, easy hill training, to your medium long runs in the weeks starting about now, about seven weeks out and going all the way up to the second to last week of training. So week seven down to week two, if we're counting down to race day. And during those weeks, what I want you to do on your medium long run is to find a gradual hill. It could be four to six percent gradient or so. And I just want you to, after a warm up, run up and down that hill easy, at easy efforts. Keep your heart rate in control. So don't do this in a way that's hard. So you're going to have to go slow, really slow perhaps on the uphills in order to keep your heart rate in control. But I want you to just run up and down that hill as easy as you can for the next six or so medium long runs. And you can find the longest hill that you can. That's 4 to 6% grade, so it's not too boring. And then I want you to do a mile and a half or so warm up, run up and down that hill at easy efforts, keeping that heart rate in control, to work on that climbing as well as eccentric loading on the descent, and then do about a mile or so cool down from there on flatter terrain. I want you to do that for the next six weeks. And then of course, don't do it the last week of training. When you're in the taper mode, but do it for those next six weeks in prep. And if you can do that, and again, I know it's boring, but if you're serious about really crushing Boston, then this will be something that you prioritize, so that you can work on that eccentric loading. And it's absolutely critical that you do it at easy efforts, so that this doesn't become another workout. This is really just all about stealing and preparing the legs and the muscles of the legs to run the distance. And so we're getting used to that pounding by doing simple downhill running. So it shouldn't be hard. It should be easy efforts still. As slow as you need to go to keep the heart rate in an easy run space. And just do it for the next six medium long runs. And I promise you that will make a difference in terms of how your legs are prepared for the terrain of Boston. And same goes for anybody doing a downhill race, whether that be Ojai or Mount Charleston or whatever it may be. In week seven to two or so, counting down to race day, do this work on easy medium long runs up and down as long a hill as you can find. So that's tip number one. Tip number two, you have to prepare for the potential heat of race day. And this, you never know what the weather's gonna do in Boston, but I would say nine times out of 10, it's far from perfect. So you're gonna have to be ready for the heat, the cold, the wind, the rain, whatever it may be. And if you're training anywhere in the US., most likely you're getting plenty of work in the cold and the wind, and perhaps the rain. But it's hardest to train for the heat this time of year. But I do think it's important to prepare for it. And we do know that there are protocols that we can put in place using sauna or hot tubs to prepare for this. And maybe you don't have access to one of those, and look, I understand that's okay. The other thing you can do, by the way, is wear multiple layers of clothing. Like overdo your layers on some of your runs in order to prepare. So if you can't do this, if you can't do the sauna or hot tub protocol, then I would consider over layering on some runs in order to prepare. So what do we think about from a hot tub or sauna protocol standpoint? For this, you want to be thinking about it for about four weeks in prep. So we want to work from about six weeks to about two weeks out from race day. You want to be doing two to three sauna sessions or hot tub sessions a week, ideally after your runs. But if you can't make it work after your runs, there's still some benefit. But two to three sauna sessions or hot tub sessions a week after your runs from week seven to week two, if we're counting down, out, to make sure that we're getting that opportunity to heat acclimate. And if we don't have the opportunity to do it that way, then what I would do is I would be wearing, I would be over layering, wearing multiple layers on top, throwing on a beanie and gloves on a day that's not frigidly cold. Or if it is frigidly cold, adding even more layers to make it uncomfortable, and do that on some of your easier runs during the week, a couple of those a week, so that you can prepare and heat acclimate as best as possible. And from a sauna and hot tub session, you want those to be about 20 minutes in length after those runs when you get those opportunities. So think about that heat acclimation in whatever format that you can. If you're really, really serious about Cresting Boston, use a sauna, use a hot tub, overlay or on a couple of runs a week to try to get that heat acclimation so that you're as ready as you can. And you're not going to be able to make it perfect in preparation, but those are ways you can definitely be more ready. And then the last thing that I'm going to talk about here is just making sure that you're doing as best you can to simulate race day. For my Boston racers, I've got them doing long run workouts on March 15th weekend and March 29th weekend. And on that 29th weekend, that's going to be on what we call our, here in Austin, at least our Boston simulator course, where people are running a course that mimics the terrain of Boston. We start in Northwest Austin. We run point to point. We've got some plenty of downhill miles in there, and then we've got our own section of Newton Hills built in using the hills here in Austin in order to simulate the course as much as possible. But this is where, to me, it's fun to get creative with your training. If you're looking at these long runs over the next month, particularly in March, because once we get into April, we're in that taper mode, how can you create long run courses that as best as possible mimic the course and so that you can practice not only the eccentric loading of that, but also practice marathon pace, running marathon pace on rolling terrain. So that's something we'll be doing here and something you should be thinking about. If you don't have access to hills, then you might have to get creative about it by throwing in some parking garages or just finding that one hill that you have in town and running up and down during the middle of your long runs. But think about it, get creative and figure out how you're incorporating Boston similar terrain, both the downhills and the uphills, in your long runs so that you're not only physically ready but also mentally ready to face that terrain. I find those things absolutely critical to getting the most out of Boston. So again, prep your hills with some hilly medium long runs. Work on that heat acclimation and work on simulating the course as best you can, particularly in some of these March long runs. It doesn't have to be all of them, but I would say pick at least two where you're simulating the course as much as you can in order to, again, match your preparation both physically and mentally to what you will face from Hopkinson to Boston on race day. So there you go. Boston runners, get ready. Seven weeks to go and I'm excited for you and I'll be out there with bells on cheering everybody in as I'll be coaching there in Boston that weekend. So with that, we're going to wrap this episode. As always, you can check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Twitter, Instagram, or Facebook. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.