Hey, everybody, welcome to episode 369 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung, coming to you from Austin, Texas. And the day this episode comes out will be my wife's birthday, so I have to give a shout out to Mrs. Running Rogue, Dr. Amy McClung, my wife of 21 years. She's always been so, so supportive of my efforts and pursuits in the run coaching space. And so, shout out to her, love her. Happy birthday, Amy. All right, we're going to do a short and sweet episode today. I've got some listener questions to get to. Really appreciate you sending those whenever you send them. I don't always get back to them right away, but I love saving them up for episodes just like this. So you can always, if interested, email me at chrisatroguerunning.com. Of course, you can also check out any of our information out on the coaching that we offer, both virtual and in person, in Dallas and Austin, if you go to rogerunning.com. But we're going to keep this intro short and sweet and dive right in with our first question. Here we go. And these first two are actually from listener Jake. He first asked about optimal weight and BMI. I'm 49, 55, and 140. I'm building for my second marathon, running between 40 and 50 miles a week. I know everyone is different, but I often wonder what effect, if any, my weight has on performance and recovery, and if I should strive for a lower range. Ran 316 my first time out and shooting for a bigger BQ buffer around 310. Sounds like Jake is pretty early in his marathoning journey, and I actually have a whole episode on what I call the mythology of race weight, episode 222, if you want to go back and listen to that. I find that regarding weight, people often oversimplify the equation, and they think of weight as being some sort of input to the process of training when it's really an output of healthy habits. And so in that episode, I talk about really focusing less on a number on the scale and more on the healthy inputs that are going to get you to the right performance, which includes obviously all the training principles that we've talked about on this podcast. You're Jake, already working on the most important of them, which is building consistent volume, and you're at 40 to 50 miles a week, which is great. And if you continue to string together training blocks at those mileage levels and potentially higher as you work up, you're going to see results. So that's obviously one part of the healthy inputs. Another part of healthy inputs is getting plenty of fueling to do the work that is required, especially in those windows after speed workouts and long runs when we're most optimally seeking the fuel needed to rebuild the system so you can go for more. And so, that's another healthy input. And there's a whole lot of them, but I tell you what is not an input is weight. And I think people often oversimplify the thought process around weight and running. They oversimplify it to a number on a scale versus body composition and all the things that go into what results in that weight on a scale, including hydration, including fueling, including body fat percentages, all of those things. And so for my message to you, Jake is not to worry about a number on a scale. Focus on those healthy inputs, train properly, follow the principles I talk on this podcast, hydrate well, fuel well. Obviously when you're fueling, choose whole foods and eat plenty of balance in those whole foods and keep doing what you're doing because you will continue to see progress without having to worry about the number on the scale. Healthy inputs equals healthy outputs. Because there's so many things that affect that number on the scale, and if you're going to manage around that, it can become very dangerous from my perspective. And also, I don't think we know exactly what the number is, but we always try to micromanage to a number, and that isn't useful. If you're going to do that or going to get precise about it, then only do it under the guidance and counsel of a nutritionist who works with athletes. That's my number one recommendation. If you're going to go down that path, but I don't think you need to keep focused on doing the right things from a training perspective and fueling well, getting enough fuel along the way, you'll be just fine. And again, if you want more on all of that, episode 222 is a pretty good one where I talk about this in much more detail. So that's Jake's first question, Jake's second question, which is a great one and something I've seen evidence of playing out in races recently in both Houston and the Austin Marathon this past weekend. The other topic is running tangents, he says. I ran about a thousand meters extra last marathon and generally run a bit longer than the race distance. Is there a way to combat this? I understand the concept of running tangents, but not really sure how to put that into practice. So he ran about 0.6 miles too far, meaning he put in a 26.8 mile marathon, and that is definitely something you want to think about and work on. Now, the tricky part about this is that it's impossible, or at least nearly impossible, to run exactly 26.2 miles in a race because of how they measure these things. These things are measured with no cars on the road or with the police escort, often times. And they're cutting exactly the shortest distance between two points around all the curves, all the turns, all the winds in the road. And so they're able to very precisely hit the exact shortest distance, 26.2 when they're measuring the course. And so that's the way it's measured. And so naturally, we're never going to be able to match that. There are some races that have that amazing blue line, which represents the tangents. But usually, as a practical matter, especially for those of us in the main field, not in the elite field, it's going to be nearly impossible to stay on that blue line with all of the people around us. And so you're going to run more than 26.2 miles in a marathon. It's just a question of can you limit that number as much as possible. And I think if you can get to 26.4 to 26.5 miles, then you're doing pretty well in a race. That's a pretty normal overage in a marathon. But yeah, if you're going.6 more, then you're definitely adding distance. And so how can we think about running the tangents? And I would argue that this depends a little bit on the nature of the course and the things you got to think about. If we want to get really deep in the weeds on this, one of the things that I do in advance of a race is I actually go to the USATF website, and they have a database of all the USATF certified and measured courses, which any of the races that are certified and official in terms of their distance are going to have a course map on that site. And this, by the way, includes not just marathons, but any distance race you might be doing if the course has been distance certified. And so if you go on that, it gives you all the details on the course, typically in a map that doesn't look like a race course map you would see on a race website, but is one that will have descriptions and also sometimes hand-drawn examples of what's happening on the course in various spots, particularly if there's a question about how that course should be marked. So for example, if there's a two-lane road, but the runners are only going to be available to run in one of those lanes, that's going to be noted and marked. And sometimes you'll see that the course actually is certified based on being able to run in both lanes, but the course is actually marked in a way that has only one lane available for you to run in. So sometimes you get a difference in perspective between the traffic plan that the race has to execute and the course certified plan, which might imply something different. But either way, it's going to give you details on what the tangent issues on that course look like. And so you can actually go and look at that chart and door map and get a better understanding of what you're in for so that you can pre-plan your concepts around running the tangent before you even set foot on the course. Certainly we'll talk about tips there, but this is the place I like to start is to be able to be aware of the challenges with measuring the course, how those challenges are represented on the measured course map so that I can visualize the things I'm going to be facing when trying to run that shortest distance out on the course. So that's one thing I do. And then of course once you get out there, the key really is understanding where those challenges are going to be. And so if you've studied the course map, you've looked at that certification map, then you're going to have a sense for what's coming. And there may be situations where you make strategic decisions to go differently than the tangents. So for example, in the Chicago Marathon, in those opening miles, you make several turns. And I recommend that people not worry about the tangents and in fact maybe run longer intentionally because if you're trying to run tight into the turns early in Chicago in that crowded race, then often you can get hemmed into the corners by the crowd, which causes you to slow down more than if you're rounding those corners a little bit more and able to maintain your rhythm and consistent pace. While later in the marathon, when things start to open up a little bit, then you can actually get more strategic and tactical and specific about hitting those tangents later in that Chicago race. So you have to have a little bit of a strategy, and there may be a strategy in certain sections where the tangents don't make sense. Now, of course, in a race where you have unlimited access to the tangents because the numbers aren't such that it's crazy like Chicago, then the key thing there is having the strategy coming in, and then of course, paying attention while you're running. And that's keeping those eyes up so that you can find the shortest path on the race course. And if you're looking up, you can see those straight lines, and you can run from one point to another. Now, it can become tricky if you're on a curved road that's kind of weaving back and forth, or curving back and forth, you'll find that people tend to follow the curve. And if you follow the people, instead of looking ahead and trying to find the straightest line, then you'll end up going longer. This was happening in Houston in those final three miles, when I was out there running with some of my athletes, or cheering them on. This was happening in Austin, actually around miles seven and eight of the course, where there was a wide four-lane road that people could navigate on either side. It was wide open, but it was curving back and forth. And I found people, as I was out there looking and cheering this past Sunday, following the curve, rather than running a straight line through those curves, which might mean that you're navigating across lanes or straight through a section versus following that curve. But if it's open to you, and there are no cones restricting you, and the course map says it's okay to do that, then you can run straight through. And yet, so many people were just following the crowd and winding around the curves versus running the straightest path from one point to another through that section. And so those are the sections that are most difficult to navigate because you have to keep your eyes up and really look for that straightest path from one point to another. And then obviously when it comes to turns, you want to draw the straight line from one curve to the next to the extent that you can, which might mean again that you're crossing traffic lanes while you're navigating from one corner to the next corner. But if you're drawing that straight line, then that is what is required. But you got to keep your eyes up. You got to pay attention. You can't follow the crowd necessarily because most of them are running too far. And that's going to make a massive difference in the amount of distance that you run. And as I said earlier, there's no way you're going to be able to get to perfect because that's just not the nature of what we're doing out there racing versus how they measure these courses. But you should be able to get to the point where you're only adding 400 or 500 or 600 meters instead of that thousand meters that you talked about, Jake. So keep practicing it. Study ahead of time on those USATF certified course maps. Have your strategy going in and then practice it. And you can do that, by the way, on shorter distance races as well to really try to navigate and figure out how to do it before you get into that next marathon. So there you go. Thank you, Jake, for those questions. Both great ones. Good luck in that next race. All right. Next up, we have a question from listener Molly, and she asks a bread and butter question, which I've answered certainly before on this podcast, but I think it's always good to go back to. She says, I love listening to your podcast and learning new facts about running and training. I've always been a runner, but recently got into running half and full marathon distances in college. I also race shorter distances with my school's run club, but focus more on the longer distances. My goals for this year include running a PR in both the half marathon and the marathon. One thing I struggle with when training for these races is maintaining a higher mileage. If I reach anything more than 30 miles in a week, my legs feel very fatigued and I get very burnt out. This negatively affects my training for the next week. I would like to increase my training load because I feel like it will help me work on my speed, but I'm struggling to find the best way to go about that without burning out. Do you have advice for the best way to go about doing this? All right, Molly, there's a few things I want you to be thinking about, and I have a suspicion that if you're struggling with elevating those mileage levels, then that means you are not going slow enough on your easy days. That is absolutely critical to really embrace. And so that's something I would check first. If you're finding that the legs just aren't able to get to higher volume, it probably means you're not going slow enough. So I would really, really stretch the definition of slow. My typical guidelines are that we run at least a minute slower than our target marathon pace, or 90 seconds slower than our target half marathon pace on those normal easy days, and two minutes to two and a half minutes slower or slower on our recovery days as my baseline recommendation. But if you're already doing that, first of all, ask yourself, honestly, am I doing that? Am I really holding to those standards? And if I'm not, then certainly slow down. But if you're already holding to those standards, then I would consider slowing down even more, because you can't really go too slow on those easy days. Those days are about building aerobic capacity and staying healthy while doing so. So if we stretch the ability for our body to go slow and easy on those days, then it's going to help us add volume over time. You don't want to question yourself and say, well, how fast should I be going on these days? But rather, how easy can I make those easy days feel? That is the foundation for getting faster. And so I highly recommend you play with that if you haven't already. And I have a great episode on this, episode 291, that asks simply the question, is your training polarized enough? Because we need polarized training in order to be able to not only build the aerobic system in the right way to run your fastest half marathon or marathon, but we also need to do it so that we can stay healthy, so that we can sustain the work. Because when we're healthy and we can build the higher volume levels, we're going to get faster. That's our number one improvement opportunity. And oftentimes we can't access those higher mileage levels, especially when we're new to it, unless we're going easy enough on those easy days. So check out episode 291. I also recommend checking out episode 306 on the why behind running slow, because it will give you all of the reasons to do what I just described if you're not already doing it. And it will give you some tips on the answer to the question, well, can I run that slow? Or some people often say to me, I can't go that slow. And the answer is yes, you can if you work on it and practice it. And it might feel awkward at first, but that's going to help you unlock efficiency at all pace ranges, if you're willing to practice and work on running easy enough to be in the right aerobic zone to build and to stay healthy while doing it. So that's one thing I would point to. Another thing I would point to is, are you fueling enough? Because that's the other part of the equation here, is you got to fuel the body for the miles that you're running. And if you're feeling burned out, then it could be that you're not. And so I really, really recommend, especially, but, you know, all times, but especially after those longer runs and those speed workouts, that you're fueling well with a well balanced carbs, fats, protein meal that is filling after those faster or longer sessions. And I find that sometimes people get in a hurry to get to the next thing, and they're not pausing to have a proper meal after some of those harder sessions. And instead, they're grabbing a protein bar, and they're going to class, or they're going to the next thing, going to work, whatever it may be. And therefore, the body doesn't have the fuel it needs to fuel the work that you're doing and to rebuild from the work that you're doing. So make sure that's a part of the equation. And then the other thing I would point to is that when you're doing your speed workouts, make sure that you're not overreaching. So this is another common thing that I see is that people have an idea about what pace they want to run in a race, but maybe they're not quite ready for that yet. And so they're doing all their workouts based on the paces that they're dreaming about versus the paces where they already are. And so you really, really have to train where you are to get where you want to go and not overreach in speed workouts. And so you can use a two-mile time trial and plug that into a race calculator. You can also just ask yourself honestly, if my workout says to run at 10k pace, does that feel like I could sustain it for 10k? How do I feel afterwards? Am I going to the limits and edge in every workout? If so, that that's a sign that I'm overreaching, as you should always or almost always finish workouts feeling like you could do more. Because the magic around running fast and a half and full isn't about getting to the place where you're going to throw up in a workout, but rather about having control, building volume inside workouts. We're learning to run relaxed at pace and doing it in a way that's not bearing yourself, so that you can live to fight another day. You should always finish a speed workout feeling like you could do one more. So Molly, those are some things I would point to. Make sure you're going easy enough. Make sure your training's polarized enough. Make sure you're fueling well, and make sure you're not overreaching in workouts. Those things are all okay, and you're abiding by the rules in those places. Then the next thing to consider would be that there might be some sort of underlying nutritional deficit already that you're fighting against, like an anemia, for example, an iron deficiency, something like that. And so that could be a part of the equation as well, if you're just running into that burned out feeling, but you're following all the other rules about training. So, that would be another thing to look at, if everything else is looking good in terms of you're running easy enough, and you're feeling well, and you're not overreaching in workouts, if that's all checked off, then go get some blood work and check with a doctor and make sure all the underlying nutritional and blood work markers are looking good as well. So, there you go, Molly. Thanks for that question. Okay, what's next? We've got a great question from Lee Brendel. Lee has been on this podcast before a long time ago and also was one of our renegade athletes for a while. So, thanks for the question, Lee. Good to hear from you. He asks about supplements with training. And so, one of my good friends is a sub-elite triathlete and a physician recommended that I begin using creatine and ketone supplements to enhance my workouts and recovery. Both creatine and ketones are allowed by the IOC, but if it really works, doesn't that make it a performance enhancer? On the other hand, gels and caffeine definitely help me through my training runs, and I don't give that a second thought. Your stance on PDs and those who take them is pretty well established. I'd love to hear your take on this topic. I'd also be interested to hear whether you've ever tried anything other than the basic gels and sports gummies. If so, what was your impression, the pros, the cons, etc. Are they worth the high cost? Happy running, I look forward to listening to your pod on the next easy run. So good question, Lee. From my perspective with doping, I generally am pretty straightforward about it, which is that if the IOC or WADA, World Anti-Doping Association, bans it, then I'm not gonna think about it or take it. Beyond that, it's really a question of personal preference and what you wanna pay for, and then of course the efficacy of what you might be thinking about or taking. Recently, I had a listener ask about caffeine, and caffeine is one of the probably number one performance enhancing drugs out there, but it is a legal one, and so that is something that people can consider. And often, caffeine is in shells and things like that. That's something you should be thinking about as a potential tool to help you perform. People are talking a lot about bicarb these days because that can buffer lactic acid and make it easier for you to go to the well in those challenging races, particularly on the shorter side. And so that's something people are taking. Traditionally, with bicarb, that's caused a lot of stomach upset. And now Wharton has a product that potentially prevents some of those stomach issues. And so a lot of people are, at least in the elite world, considering using that as a tool because it is legal from a WADA and IOC perspective. And then we get to the things like what you're talking about, ketones and creatine. And those are actually naturally occurring things in the body. And so people are supplementing with them to get certain outcomes. And I don't think about those in a category of performance-enhancing drugs at all. Just a question of, can that be something that helps me? And I think the jury is honestly still out when it comes to both products in terms of whether it can help us from a running perspective. Now, the research on creatine is actually really good, really deep, as it relates to particularly muscle development and in sustaining muscle mass over time, particularly as we age. And so a lot of bodybuilders and weight lifters have been supplementing with creatine for a very long time to get stronger or to stay strong. And it's a legal way to do it. And it's something that, you know, many people have done, particularly in the strength world. It's only recently that we've started talking about using it for purposes beyond just getting bulky. And there's a whole whole host of things that it can do to help us that really promote longevity. I think the jury is still out of whether or not it can help us as runners. Can it make you stronger? Yes. Can it help you potentially recover faster? Yes. And so there's a natural thought process that's developing that creatine could also help us as distance runners. And so the scientific specificity on that, as it relates to helping us for a marathon, for example, is still a little bit. Jury is still out. But we do know that it can make you stronger. It can help you build muscle mass. It can help you sustain and keep muscle mass as you age. And so if that's something that you want to experiment with, then by all means, there's actually a great episode recently on this, on one of my health coaching friends who's been on this podcast, Megan Lyons. She has a health coaching business called The Lyons Share Wellness and has a podcast called Wellness Your Way. She did an episode a few weeks ago on creatine, and I think it was really, really good, really helpful, talking about the broad science and research on creatine, the benefits of it, and how you should think about supplementing. She also has some recommendations on brands to use and quantities to use and things like that in that episode. So I would go check that out from Megan. And so I would highly encourage you to do your own research on that stuff, Lee. But I don't think related to running that it's any sort of magic pill or silver bullet. And then ketones, the evidence there is that it can be used as a particularly brain fueling mechanism. And so, you know, Dez, for example, uses ketone IQ and she takes it in races. And the way she describes the impact is that it actually is there more to keep her brain sharp and focus particularly in those later parts of the race when things start to get hard. And so ketone IQ has a gel pack type format that you can take inside of a marathon to fuel, ostensibly, but also really keep that brain sharp and focused when things get hard. And so that's a potential way to consider using ketone. Some people also like to take it pre-workout to kind of give them a exogenous fuel boost going into a workout. But again, no magic pill there either or silver bullet, but it is something that people are experimenting with. And so, sure, if you want to experiment with those things, then do your research, get more information, then play with it yourself and see what works for you. But I don't see any issue with it from my standpoint. Beyond that, from a supplement standpoint, really for me, it's pretty simple. It's just about holistically keeping my health in balance. And so most of the supplemental things that I use are related to vitamin D, to keep my vitamin D levels up, taking multivitamins, to make sure that I've got the micronutrients that I need. And that's it. I'm pretty much a simpleton. Other than that, and so I may not be the best example to draw from because I'm not playing with a lot of these things myself, but it doesn't mean I have a personal issue with it. Certainly, if it's legal from an IOC and a water perspective, and you want to learn more about it and play with it on your own, then go for it. That's my take. So thanks for the question, Lee. A good topic to talk about. All right. Next up, we've got a question. Another question from Sujata. I got to some of her questions on my last listener Q&A episode, but didn't get to this one. She asks about recovery. Foam rolling, theragun, massage, chiro, PT, regular visits, et cetera. Of course, sleep is key as our slow recovery runs, but how do I prioritize the other things? It's hard to fit everything in with my job and other activities. That's a great point, Shujata. It's hard to do it all, certainly. And so here's how I think about it. And also I would point out I have a whole episode talking about recovery, so you can always go back to check out episode 296. But where do we start with recovery? First we start with the basics, the three most important things that people often lose sight of. The first that you already mentioned there, Shujata, is sleep. That's our number one recovery tool. If we're sleeping well, getting both good quantity and quality of sleep, then that is going to be the best tool you have to rebuild. And if you're not prioritizing sleep, quality and sleep quantity, then that is the place I would start. Secondly, it's that easy movement, as you also refer to those slow easy recovery runs, because movement equals blood flow equals healing. That's how we, that's how our body helps us recover from those hard and long efforts. And then third, of course, is fueling, which we've already talked about in this episode, making sure that post hard and long effort, you're getting plenty of high quality fuel when your body is most ready to absorb those nutrients and put that to work rebuilding your cells. Those are the three most important things that you can do from a recovery standpoint. If you're not optimizing those three things, then we should start there. Now, I coached Sujata, so I know that she is doing her best to optimize those three things. And so let's talk about the other things that she mentioned, the Theragun, the foam roller, those other things that you can do with other recovery modalities. Might be ice baths and massage and all of those other things that people talk about. There's a great book from Kristi Eshwandan called Good to Go that talks about the science behind all these additional kind of ancillary recovery modalities, including massage and all of those things. And I actually had her on the podcast way back in episode 110. If you want to go back to listen to that one or get her book Good to Go. But she basically concludes from the book that a lot of these other modalities don't have a lot of scientific efficacy. And you really kind of want to go back to focusing on the things that we know work, the sleep, the easy recovery movement and the fueling. But I would say that beyond those things, then it's all about you finding your routine. Because I do think that there are specific things that we know might help us individually, that we need to make sure we prioritize and build into the routine. But you have to think about it in a critical way and prioritize what's important for you And so for me, for example, outside of those three things that we just mentioned, I know that spending some time on the foam roller, whether it's real or just a placebo effect, particularly navigating the tight spots that I tend to find in my body, which are my left calf and my right quad. If I spend time foam rolling, obviously I do both sides when I'm foam rolling. But if I spend time foam rolling those areas a couple of times a week after runs, usually I also use them as a warm up tool, use that as a warm up tool before my strength sessions, and that really helps me navigate some of the biomechanical challenges that I run into, which is that I've got ankle mobility issues, and I find that using the foam roller, as well as doing other mobility exercises, helps me keep the ankle mobilized so that it prevents upstream injuries that are chronically or at least I've dealt with frequently. And so, that is something that is next on my list to include in the routine. Beyond that, honestly, I don't do much, except I do a once a month visit with my chiro, Dr. Moose, who I call the witch doctor, who not only works in chiropractic modalities, but also does a lot of other modalities, including some Eastern medicine ones, that people might find a little crazy and woo-woo, but I find that it works. And if I go to him once a month and he works on my alignment, my mobility, making sure that my muscles are active and doing their job, and then also he's able to, when I have a little thing pop up in the month, he's able to kind of address it proactively, versus me waiting for it to kind of get into a full blown injury before I go see him. And so I see him once a month, and that's also a part of my recovery, so to speak, routine or being proactive about injuries that might pop up. And yes, it costs money and it takes a little bit of time, but from my standpoint, if I'm investing in staying healthy with good sound alignment and movement patterns, then that's not only good for my running, but also ultimately good for my longevity. So I think it's something that's well worth investing in. And so that's pretty much my list of recovery things. It's the three that are the most important. For me, it's a little bit of self massage and foam rolling. Sometimes, by the way, I use the TheraGun, but I actually prefer mostly my trusty trigger point grid, this the classic foam roller. And then it's my time once a month with Dr. Moose to keep things at bay. And beyond that, there's really not a lot that I have to worry about or focus on. But for others, you might find that something else is more helpful for you, or you need interventions that you've got a history with that are going to be productive. And so think about the one or two things beyond those top three that are most important to you, that seem to have the biggest bang for their buck, so to speak, and find a way to prioritize those things and work it into your routine. And then be creative about it. You know, most of the time I spend on my foam roller is in bed watching TV or on the floor watching TV at the end of the day when I've got time to decompress and I'm able to multitask a little bit while doing so. So I think you can be creative about it. Don't overthink it. Prioritize the one or two things beyond those top three that I've mentioned. And then once you try, you know, a couple of those things that are prioritized beyond those top three, and you see if it works or doesn't work, and it will obviously evolve a little bit over time as you find the efficacy of what you're doing. But I don't think you need to overthink it. So great question. She's ought to thank you for that. And that's my last question for today. We're going to wrap it with this short and sweet episode. Thanks to all of you for asking the questions. If you have questions that you'd like to see on an episode, just shoot me an email, chris at roguerunning.com. And as always, you can check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Instagram or Facebook at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.