Hey, everybody, welcome to episode 188 of the Running Rogue Podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung, and I'm coming to you from Austin, Texas, on a Friday. Excited about this episode for you today. We've had some people ask that I get back to pure training topics because we've been spending the last several episodes on other, in my opinion, more important topics. But yes, we are a training podcast, and yes, we want you to have all of those training details. So I'm happy to bring on a guest today, Coach Jen Harney from The Rogue World. She coaches in our Cedar Park location and really runs and develops a lot of our curriculum for Rogue broadly. She is a very, very smart coaching mind, and I'm excited to have her to talk about marathon training during a pandemic. We're gonna give you eight different things to think about in how you prepare for a very uncertain fall racing season, including giving our own predictions about what might happen with that fall racing season. So with that as a very quick intro, let's jump in with Jen Harney. Here we go. Welcome, Jen Harney, to the Running Rogue podcast. How are you doing today, Jen?

Doing great. Thank you for having me on, Chris.

Thanks for being on. I'm catching you, I think, before a little afternoon outing to the lake with your boys. So I appreciate you taking the time before you go get cool in the hot summer heat in the lake. That'll be fun.

Yeah, it will be fun. We borrowed one of those lake pads from one of my runners. So they can, yeah, you know what I'm talking about.

The lily pad things that- Yeah, it's huge. Yeah, they only float because they're just so big.

Yeah, it's like that, it's massive. I don't know how I'm going to fit it on top of my car, but I'll figure it out.

Well, that'll be a fun challenge. So we're talking today about marathon training during a pandemic, because there's a lot of uncertainty right now. And I know that I'm getting a lot of questions, you're getting a lot of questions as one of our coaches on, how do I handle the uncertainty of not knowing what races will happen? What does that mean for my training? And as a part of that, I've been thinking about, okay, what are the things that look a little bit different now? Because in many cases, we're training for races that we don't know if they're gonna happen. And we really can't know at this point. We can predict, and we'll make... Actually, we'll go ahead and start with predictions, but then we'll go into eight things that we've discussed as to how you might be modifying, tweaking things to emphasize during this time so that you can get the most out of this training and make sure that whatever you do, no matter what you do, benefits you down the road, whether or not races happen or not. And that's a consistent theme that we've been preaching, that we've had elite athletes preach, including Kara Goucher, Steph Bruce, Alfine Tulemuk, that we've talked to during this time, and they've said, hey, do the work, because no matter what, the work is gonna matter. But let's start with predictions. When you get that question, Jen, it's like, hey, is this gonna happen? Obviously, we know Boston was one of the first big dominoes to fall, moving to a virtual race. But when you get that question of will races happen, when will races happen again? What do you tell people?

I tell people that I think some races will happen and I think some races won't happen. I think there are some trail races that might happen, depending on the size of the trail race. I think that some marathons will happen depending on what state they're in and also the size, again, of the marathon. So in fact, the one that's gonna happen has come up recently as St. George because races in Utah are still happening. They just put on a marathon a couple weeks ago in Utah. So yeah, I know, I know. I had a runner who was visiting there, and she said that there was a marathon going on and she was shocked, but they did it in a way, yeah. And so I think it just depends on the state and how cases are doing in those states. And then I also think it depends on the size of the race and how they can execute the race safely. Of course, I think some races will probably happen that maybe aren't safe and maybe runners don't wanna do. So I think keeping that in mind as well. But I personally don't think that the big races are gonna happen. I think it's really hard to do them safely. And I think that even to get insurance for those types of races is gonna be a challenge.

You're talking about the Chicagos, New Yorks, the Phillies of the world.

Yeah, yeah. I mean, I think that, I think Indianapolis and CIM, they're two races that we've targeted. I think it's probably a 50-50 chance, maybe less than that, that those happen. And I know a lot of my runners have then looked at Houston as kind of the next race if those don't happen. I have told them all to sign up quickly because I do think it'll sell out. But again, that's just another 50-50 that we're all just hoping for, in my opinion.

Right. Yeah, for me, it's hard to believe that any big city will race will happen before next spring. And that may even be too early. You know, I think one of two things has to happen. Either we need a vaccine, which it seems like the earliest anybody will predict that that could happen would be the beginning of next year. And that's obviously a stretch. Or if we get to a place where we can do testing so cheaply and so rapidly and accurately that you have to basically get tested and prove that you're COVID negative before you can line up at the start line. I think that's another scenario under which a big race could happen, potentially. For example, I have a friend who just had, he had to go get an MRI. So they tested him right before he got the MRI because I guess they didn't want him in the machine if he had COVID. So tested him right then, 15 minute, got his response back and was COVID negative. So he got to do the MRI and it cost him out of pocket, like $17. I don't know what may have cost the insurance and that kind of equation, but you could imagine if that was possible for somebody to prove to them, prove to a race that they could show up at the start line, I think any runner would pay $17 for a 15 minute test.

Absolutely.

To get to a start line. And so, but now the issue with that test in particular, apparently is that there are, I guess, the odds of a false negative are probably too high. So I think it's 80% accuracy or 85% accuracy, something like that, according to my friend. So if you had a situation like that where 15% of positive cases were shown as negative and correctly, that could still be a problem. So you would need a test that was cheap, quick, and accurate, essentially, for it to work in this context.

Was this in Austin, Chris? I just have to ask.

Yes, this was in Austin.

Okay, because I have had two runners go get tested, and it's taken five days for their results.

Yeah, no, that's the most common scenario, three to five days. But those tests apparently are more accurate. So there's a higher degree of accuracy, and I guess in this case, for whatever reason, they didn't require that level of accuracy. So it was literally a 15-minute turnaround and super cheap.

Yeah.

But anyway, those are the ways I think a race could happen without a vaccine, as if you could get a rapid test situation. But basically, I think you're right in the sense that those big city races probably aren't gonna happen. Now, that's not to say you can't do it virtually, because I think there are merits and potentially some excitement to be had around a virtual Boston, for example. Now, you could say, of course, it's harder to get excited about a virtual race and maybe put your best foot forward. But the flip side of that is, if you're using your garment to measure your 26.2 miles versus a course where you have to try to run the tangents.

Yeah, that's true.

There's an advantage to be gained there, because you're not having to worry about tangents, and you can stop when you get to 26.2 versus when the finish line is at 26.5, like has often happened.

Yeah, you gain like a minute.

Yeah, so you gain some time there. So that's something to think about potentially for those considering virtual races. But anyway, I tend to agree with you. The races that will happen are the small races where you can actually do a very distanced kind of wave start or time trial start. You know, I was talking to Branson and Ahm with Austin Runners Club, and they have a half marathon called the Decker Challenge in December in Austin, and it's about a thousand people. It's out on county roads that are pretty, pretty low traffic on a Sunday morning. And, you know, they're talking about being able to still do that race and just sending people off every 15 to 30 seconds, you know, time trial style.

Did they mention that having like a cap for the race? Because I already have runners that have talked about doing that race as also a backup. So I'm curious if there's...

I don't know. I haven't gotten to that level of questioning. I don't know that they've gotten to that level of planning, but I would assume there would have to be a cap, you know, because you can only schedule people and so many over a certain period of time. So anyway, but races, I think, that are small enough could go off like that. I mean, I think about... In Texas, I think about the Bryan College Station marathon, for example. You know, that's, I think, typically 400 to 500 marathoners. They have more than that in the half, but, you know, if you set people off in small enough groups, then the only thing you really have to figure out, then, is the aid station situation. And I know people are starting to get creative with that, too. So...

Interesting.

So all that's to say, you know, the big races probably won't happen. And that means everybody needs to make some decisions, which could potentially mean having a backup option. And so that is a good segue to my first point to make here on marathon training during a pandemic, which is that you gotta have options. You gotta have options. And that can mean having options in terms of races, like two different marathons that you could consider in a certain window. So if I think about those who might be training for a December marathon, for example, CIM or Dallas, you know, potentially having an option as a backup that would be a smaller race that might draw more locally, that would be smaller, kind of like Bryan College Station, for example, which also happens in December. You want to think about that. What are your options? Including, is a virtual race an option? And if so, what would that look like for you? You know, could you get a handful of friends to go out there and do it with you? We're going to be doing a virtual Boston here in Austin for our runners, keeping that on the down low. But so we don't get too many people out there. But that is an option. That's a backup for those who obviously had Boston on the calendar. So to me, optionality is the first question or is the first point. And, you know, and then that means you just got to kind of look at what your options are, given what you might have access to locally, and then start to do some research on how those races are handling their discussions about this pandemic. For example, I have somebody who's looking at one of the tunnel races in Seattle area in September, because they're small. It happens largely on a trail, you know, like a crush granite trail. And so far, the race director is saying that it's on, and they're going to kind of figure out how to make it work. And so I've got a runner who's looking at that particular race as an option.

I have someone doing that race as well, also in September. So, yeah, she's reached out to them, and they said it's on. So she's training for it.

Yep. So as it relates to optionality, what would you tell people? What would you tell people who are thinking about giving themselves a few different things to target?

Well, I've told my runners, and because we have had this conversation a lot of different times throughout this entire pandemic, and I've told them that, one, to me, we can always put on a virtual race within our team, and we can pick a really cold day in November. We can pick a flat course that's a loop and put something on if there isn't going to be their big race that's in, like, a Chicago or Indianapolis or Philadelphia. And then, or, so they could do that, or they could continue to push races out. But I do think there are going to be even smaller half marathons that happen, so maybe transitioning from a marathon to half marathon training is okay, and I think that that's... I think that there are a lot more half marathons that will go on, I think, than marathons, because they're easier to put on, they're less expensive, and you can bounce back from them much faster. So you can leave everything out there and bounce back a lot faster than you can from a marathon. So that's another option that I've given runners, is maybe transitioning over to a half marathon training.

Yeah, you bring up a good point, which is that you can always pivot from marathon training to target something else. And especially with all the work you're doing early in marathon training is going to build a foundation that would serve well racing any other distance. And so that creates a nice transition to a second point that I wanted to make on this discussion, which is to be ready to pivot and to create for yourself a little bit of a decision timeline on when and how you might pivot. And I fully recognize that's hard to do in a situation that involves uncertainty because you may not know when a race is going to announce something and when you're going to know about how that race is going to play out or not. But regardless, I think you need to try to give yourself a deadline, so to speak, of when to pivot. I know I have a lot of people that are thinking about the big city races, for example, Chicago, New York, Philly, Marine Corps, and none of those races to this point have announced anything. Chicago, I think, sent out an email that said, we don't know, and we don't know when we're going to tell you. It's like, why would you say that in an email? But we'll tell you soon, I think, is what they said.

Yeah, they said they would give everyone a refund if they don't. They did say that, too.

Which is all good and fine. Which is all good, but it's like, come on, just give us a deadline. Because you need to tell people sooner rather than later. But if it were me, and I'd signed up for Chicago, and that happens in early October, then I would set my own deadline. It's like, okay, by end of July, I'm going to pivot. If I don't have... Either I make a decision, if Chicago hasn't made a decision, I'll make a decision. And pivot a different direction. You know, because a race like that most likely isn't going to happen. And you want to be able to pivot in enough time to prepare for something else, whether that be a smaller marathon or that be a half marathon or switching down to going for a virtual 5K potentially, which is always something you can do. So give yourself a deadline to pivot and then give yourself enough time after you pivot to actually pivot to something meaningful and give yourself an opportunity to prepare for that.

Yeah, so Chris, just, you know, a good time frame to pivot would be right before you start that marathon phase, which is usually the last, you know, nine to 12 weeks, right? I mean, that's what we've done in our training, and so that might be a good time for people to pivot and say, okay, instead of doing a race-specific phase for a marathon, I do a race-specific phase for a 5K or a race-specific phase for a half marathon.

Yeah, I mean, basically, take your taper, which is two or three weeks, right? And then add your race-specific phase, which for us tends to be anywhere from four to eight weeks, depending. And so three plus four to eight, that kind of gives you your window. And everybody who, based on whatever schedule you're following, you're going to be able to either talk to your coach or look at that schedule and say, okay, how long is that marathon-specific phase where I'm really focused on marathon-specific work? And just before that, make your decision.

Yeah, I like that idea.

And I think as a part of that, you have to be ready to pivot and not look back, especially if there's still uncertainty about a race. For me, just to be completely transparent, if I had signed up for Chicago, I would have already pivoted off of it. Really? Yeah, I think the likelihood of a 40, 000-person race drawing from all over the world happening in Illinois, which has been, by the way, one of the worst-hit states, is like zero. It is as close to zero as it can be. It's maybe non-zero, but it's close to zero. So I would have already pivoted off of Chicago and either looked at a smaller race around that same time or decided to focus on something else. I'm just being transparent for me. I'm saying that would be how I would make that decision. I'm not projecting that decision on anybody else because I completely understand how somebody else might not be prepared to make that call and might be holding out hope, and that's also okay because you don't have to pivot yet. But at some point, you know, eight to 12 weeks out from Chicago, like you said, you have to make that call, whether they've made it or not. And then don't look back.

I feel like Chicago will announce something at some point in July. I think that that's the right thing to do as a race that large.

So I agree with you. But just in case. Yeah, to me, it's slightly frustrating that they haven't already made a call. But I understand it. I also have a lot of sympathy and empathy for those race directors, because they're navigating impossible decisions. So that's point two. Be ready to pivot. Set a deadline for your pivot so that you can still get something meaningful out of whatever backup option you're planning. The third point, which is kind of related, is this idea that because your backup option may end up not working out, and you may need to end up going to option three or four and pivoting entirely to a virtual race or whatever, is train for a plateau, not a peak. Give yourself a window of fitness versus trying to peak for a specific day. And I would say this flies in the face of everything that we tell people normally. So this is a very anti-Rogue training philosophy perspective, but one that I think is required right now is that you're not going to be able to count on something happening unless you pick a day that you want to go run a virtual 5K. You're not going to be able to count on peaking for a given day necessarily, and so you need to peak for a plateau, or try to train for a plateau rather than a peak. Give yourself a window of two to max four weeks where potentially you can get to peak fitness and try to hold on to something, and then maybe give yourself a few options during that week. You need that window, that plateau, to go show your fitness. But that's hard to do. So what would you say? How do you do that?

So, yeah, so I was just thinking through that, Chris. I think from a training standpoint, what you would want to do to peak for a plateau as opposed to peaking for just one day in one particular race, too. I mean, because even if you're talking about a plateau, that could look like a marathon or it could look like a 10K, too. We don't really know. And so what I would recommend would be people to train all their energy systems all basically for this entire time. So not just focusing on marathon pacing for just a certain amount of time, but really focusing on sprinkling a little bit of speed, sprinkling a little bit of 5K, 10K, sprinkling a little bit of half marathon or LT work or aerobic threshold work, and then sprinkling a little bit of marathon work. And I think if you keep your fitness up by adding in that variety, you can always hone in on one of those key areas to focus on a particular race distance. Within a period of time, I would say probably 4 to 6 weeks. And then I would also of course recommend keeping long runs in a range where you can either bring them up for marathon, so having like a nice base of 12 to 18 miles, or you can bring them down for a 10K if you need to. So I think just keeping your long runs up and then adding in a lot of keeping variety with your workouts and making sure that you're training all the energy systems and not really just focused on speed. Or if you were doing 5K, you would mainly focus on 5K type training, but really keeping all of the energy systems trained at all times. That would be what I would recommend. I don't know if that answers your question though.

No, it does. It does. I mean, I think it not only gives you that ability to train for a range of time, but it also I think sets you up for ensuring that whatever you do now will pay off down the road regardless. The other thing I would say is that typically when we're peaking for a given day, then we will have a big race prep that might be three or four weeks out from your target race day. And that probably isn't really the way you want to approach it right now. You know, having that really, you don't want to have really big efforts that are going to then set you on a clock that essentially means, okay, now you got to go use that fitness. You just put all your tips on the table. Now you got to call the bet and make sure that that one day happens. I don't think you can do that. I don't think at any point during this training cycle, can you put all your chips on the table? I think you always have to be training a little bit below the radar, a little bit further from that edge, which will allow the body to not get that signal that, okay, it's time to go.

Yeah, I agree with that. I agree with you. I think the only difference would be if someone is dead set on doing an all-out race effort for Boston, then they would want to continue to train. And I personally am not recommending any of my runners to do that just because we live in Texas, and in September it's really hot, and so to me it's not worth doing an all-out effort at that time of year. But if you lived up north where it was cold, then maybe that would be something that someone would want to do. I don't know.

I agree with that. All right, so that was number three. Let's go to number four, which is... and it really kind of relates, which is this idea of, you know, don't forget about the bread and butter. Make sure you're focusing on the bread and butter, and at some level, keeping it simple. Because if you do that, then not only will it pay dividends now, but it'll pay dividends down the road. So for me, one example of that, and then I'll love to get your examples, would be making sure you're working in strides. Weekly...

I was going to say that.

Yeah, right. You and I think too much alike. Like weekly strides. It's like once a week, do strides. Four to six flat strides, 80 to 100 meters, controlled fast effort. Because that's going to be that, as I've been talking about it with my athletes recently, it's that little inoculation of speed. It's like allergy shots that don't matter when you do them once, twice, three times, but they matter for sure if you do them once a week, week after week, month after month, year after year. And so make sure you're doing that work, because not only will it pay off now, it'll pay off down the road. So that's a bread and butter example. What else?

Yeah, so I would say, well, one, I have my team do strides pretty much every week in a disguise, so sometimes it looks like strides, and sometimes it looks a little different with short pickups and a fart lick. But I also think fart licks are a simple workout, and you can vary them in all different types of ways. And to me, I always look at a fart lick, especially when they're short, as an elongated stride. It's just a longer version of a stride. And it's a little bit of speed work that I think are great.

Yeah, which is a good point. You can always work in 20 or 30 second pickups into a run to replicate the same concept. So don't forget your bread and butter. Also part of bread and butter is just getting in the miles, just being consistent. And it doesn't have to be perfect. But I'll say, I know for me personally, not having a race on the calendar this spring made me more consistent maybe than I've ever been from the time period between March and June. Because normally I would race something, typically in April or May, and then that would take me out for three weeks, you know, where I'm recovering. And instead of that, I've just been cranking out 70-mile weeks. And so I've had a more consistent spring and early summer. Gosh, we're not even actually officially to summer yet, but it feels like it. It's pre-summer here in Texas. And that is only going to pay dividends. And so if you're also just focusing on when in doubt, getting in the miles with your strides, that's also going to pay dividends regardless of what happens with races.

Yeah, I was going to say, I have a couple of runners that are doing a monthly mileage challenge for themselves, trying to hit so many miles per week every month. And that's been really good. And then I have another few runners that have been doing a streak since we went into basically stay-at-home orders. So right at the end of spring break. And I think one of them told me she's on day 90. So that's something cool that I think gets you out the door. And that consistency is so important. To being a fit runner down the road.

Yep. Love that. That was four. Keep it simple. Don't forget the bread and butter. Number five is that this is also a time, and you're the one that really brought this up, to work on your weaknesses. To keep those core elements in place, but then have the freedom and flexibility to work on the things that you need to work on. So what does that look like for some of your athletes?

So for a lot of them, it looks like a lot of strength training, a lot of core work. So glute work, core work. I've been teaching a strength class with my team every Monday and Wednesday at noon, just for anybody who wants to come. And we just work on basically abs, planks, variations of planks, some push-ups, and a lot of glute work. So that's been really good. For other runners, I think it's, you know, some of them have been doing Pilates and yoga, which has also been great. They've also created strength challenges within the team. Like, I know you saw this, but there was the handstand T-shirt challenge, which was pretty cool to watch.

So they were trying to take off or put on a shirt while doing a handstand or...

And they did it. I mean, it was pretty cool. But for a lot of them, now they have more time because they're not traveling for work or commuting for work. And because they're not having to get ready for work, they have this extra time that they can devote to strength training. For other athletes, I think maybe their weaknesses was, their weakness was consistency. Before, it was hard to get in five days or six days of running, and now that's something that they're focusing on, is that weakness of consistency. So I think it's different for everybody, but I've noticed for a lot of runners, it is putting in the time for strength training.

Yeah, I think the same would be true in my group as well. And we've introduced a strength protocol during this time that people are able to follow along the videos virtually. And I know a lot of people have invested time in that because they have the time and because the uncertainty gives them the opportunity to focus there and to deal with whatever adaptation may be required and slowing down on your running or backing off a little bit on your running in order to incorporate that into their routine so that it all fits together. But yeah, critical. You know, you've got the time, work on those weaknesses, and you kind of brought it up, which kind of transitions us to number six, this idea of also using this as a way to experiment with some new things, add some spice, maybe some new challenges to the fold. And so that can involve working your weaknesses, and that can be a form of that. But it can also just involve doing other things to keep it fun and interesting. I know for me, doing some fun, new and different things has helped me stay motivated, like I did the Vagabond time trials that Jason and Mallory put on for May, which was a way to have some fun. We've got this whole front door 5K thing happening with Rogue, which surprisingly I've actually, even though I hate 5Ks, I've embraced and kind of enjoying the challenge of it. But there are a lot of other challenges you could face or take on from trying new workouts to adding in fun little fart licks on your long runs, a little bit of spice, to doing some of these virtual challenges that are not only virtual races, but potentially just virtual mileage challenges. For example, I have some people in my group doing the virtual run across Tennessee. And I think it's put on by the same guy who does the Barclays Marathon, I think. And so you can run across Tennessee and basically track where you are in the journey. And there's a new one that's been going around the Rogue Nation Facebook page of you can think run around Texas. Or there's options of either running across or around Texas as a way.

Yeah, they had the city one, too, where you could run from Houston to Dallas or Austin to Houston. That was one, too.

And it's just a fun way to stay excited, motivated, find a community of people that are doing something similar to keep you out there and to keep it going.

I agree. I've had runners that are signing up for some of the trail races that haven't done trail before, which is exciting. And then I've been adding in a lot of new workouts. Not a lot, but I mean, probably at least five or six new workouts that my team's never done. We started doing hill sprints, like just 20-second hill sprints at the end of a long run, just to add in something different and new. We added in a couple new fartlegs, a couple new workouts. And then I told you before the call the fartleg during the long run, which has been really great for runners to just make the long run go by a lot faster. And you get a lot of recovery in the fartleg, so it's not something that leaves you completely spent or anything like that. It's just something to change gears a little bit. And that's been fun for the runners, I think, to add in some new workouts. I also think, Chris, if runners have ever read online a workout that they thought maybe looked fun, but it didn't fit with their training, or maybe they read a training book and they saw this workout and they thought, oh, I've always wanted to do that, but it didn't fit with what I was training for. Now would be the time to try that workout and just kind of do something fun and different.

Yeah. Yeah, I think it's critical to keep it exciting right now and to really gravitate towards the stuff that you enjoy and cut the workouts you hate, bring in new workouts. It doesn't mean you don't do work because that's still important, but you do have flexibility to kind of mix things up and then see what you like, try something new on and roll with it or discard it if you don't like it. I know early on and during the quarantine, I was struggling with long runs, keeping them interesting. And so every week it became a challenge of, okay, what am I going to do this week with my long run in order to make it interesting and want to go do it? And so that came in different forms. Sometimes it was adding a little farlic in, sometimes it was doing a new route.

You did some epic stuff.

Sometimes it was finding all the hills in Austin that I could possibly run and running them in one long run, which for whatever reason was interesting at the time. And I actually enjoyed it when the weather was cool. That was what was motivating me now. I don't think I would do that again. But yeah, but you have to do that. Find the things that are going to be interesting to you, and what works for one person may not work for you. So collect people's perspectives on what they're doing, but you don't have to necessarily follow along with someone else. But keep it fun, keep it interesting. Add the spice. A related point to that, which you kind of brought up, and I just brought up, really is the long runs. And how do we treat those during this time? And you said a little bit earlier in the discussion, this idea that you want to have flexibility with your long runs, where you can ramp up or ramp down, depending on how you might pivot. You also mentioned adding some spice to the long runs, if you needed to, to keep things interesting. And, you know, so those are obviously a couple of elements to emphasize, but the long run is still important for marathon training. So that's, you know, important to emphasize. But you do have some flexibility about how you might treat that long run right now. For some in my group who are in marathon training, but aren't ready yet to fully commit to it because they don't know if their race is going to happen, they're like, I don't want to do 20 mile runs yet until I know more. So I'm like, all right, let's get up to 18. For whatever reason, there's a psychological difference there. And a physical difference. And so we're going to work them up to 18 until we have more information, and then we'll build up from there if needed, and we might get a few fewer 20 milers this cycle. But if that's what we need to do to kind of keep them right where they need to be, then that's okay. For my podcast training group, I'm trying to avoid the big, really rigorous long run workouts. And yeah, we're doing some of those, but not anything too crazy. And instead, I'm working in a few more long runs without nutrition to try to work on fat burning and to build muscular resilience, which is something that that can do. So we've pivoted to more nutrition long runs in that training schedule. So there's a lot of things you can do from managing the distance, adding a little spice, working on some different elements, perhaps with no nutrition long runs to that long run. It still means it's important, but you have flexibility with how you might treat it, I think, right now.

I agree with you. Obviously, I agree with you. One of the things one of my runners is doing during the summer, because he has really struggled with summer training and the heat, is I'm giving him long run heart rate ranges so that he keeps his heart rate in a certain range during the long run. And that's something that he's never done before, and I've also never done before with a runner. I don't normally do that, but it's worked great for him and it's made his long runs a lot more enjoyable because he's not completely spent afterwards to where he can't, he doesn't do anything the rest of the day or something like that. So that's something good, I think, to just keep that. And then the other thing we do, instead of doing big long run workouts, and I know all of Rogue does this, instead of doing a big long run workout, you can always just throw in a close or a faster finish or a little progression towards the end of your long run. And it's to me just as beneficial as doing no nutrition. It's just a different type of way to test the body.

Yeah, good point. Work on those fast finishes. So, manage your long runs. That's number seven. Then the last point I wanted to make is really to address this point of motivation. And it comes back to a point I've made more times than I can count on this podcast, which is that you have to know your why. And that why may need to evolve for this window of time. Because I know oftentimes for people, their why is associated with a specific goal, with a specific race. And I think given the uncertainty that exists right now, you can't rely on those types of whys, those purposes to sustain you. Because if that's all you have, then it might get ripped out from under you tomorrow when your race says it's canceled. And so you have to kind of go a click up and maybe spend some time thinking about why do I do this that is beyond the goal, beyond the race day, and really try to connect to that purpose. And so for me, just as an example, it's actually been running has been a lot of things during this time, but one of the things it's been is an outlet for just processing the world's shit, frankly, right now. And so I've really leaned into that. It's like I need to do my runs just so I can manage all the stuff we're dealing with. And I've really leaned into that idea, really reflected on it, really tried to connect to it, using running as an outlet. Running has also become, now that we're back in group, running at Rogue as a way to just connect to my team. And I'm really leaning into that idea of running as a community building thing. And honestly, at this point, I'm not even thinking about races at all. I don't have any races on the calendar. I was going to do Run for the Water if it happened, but really I'm not training for that in any specific way because I doubt that that will happen, that 10-mileer in Austin. So the point is, this last point, you've got to really think about your why and connect to running on a deeper level, a bigger level, which I've talked about many times on this podcast. Maybe you've listened, maybe you haven't, but this is the time to go back and do a little bit of thinking and work on what does this mean to you beyond the time goal, beyond the race day?

I agree with you, Chris. I think definitely people need to think about what's motivating them to get out the door and why are they... Because most people sign up for a race and that's what gets them out the door. Knowing that those aren't going to happen means that people need to re-evaluate. I want to say for me, it's been really refreshing to... I've been running with my son, who has really come into running during this... As soon as school shut down, he started running six days a week. And it's been our time to run together and to talk and to connect in a different way because he's 16 years old. So when they're 16, they don't want to hang out with you as much anymore. You know? But we've been running so much together, and that's really motivated me. And this morning, just so you know, this is how motivated both my kids are right now. I slept in and I woke up, and I asked Mark, I said, where are the boys? Oh, they went to go run.

And without you?

Without me. That was probably the best moment I've ever woken up to, the best way I've ever woken up, right? Is that they're so motivated right now, and they motivate me to get going. Obviously, they didn't wake me up because they said they felt like I needed to sleep. But it was pretty awesome. So that's been really cool to get to run with my son, who was not a runner like two years ago. So that's pretty neat. And I think for a lot of people, it's such a great time to get out the door and not have to listen to the news or deal with the stress that's going on in the world right now. So the quiet time of running and the reflection that you can have on a run is just pretty beautiful.

Yeah, it is. Yeah, it's beautiful that your sons can now hold that over you, you know? Yeah, we got our run done today, Jen. You know, Mom, where are you? But I love that. And it underscores the importance of having a tribe, whether that be kids, family, friends, others that are around you who are like-minded, who are getting it done as well, who can hold you accountable, but also help you see the beauty of it. And so I would also encourage everybody to tap into that, tap into the community that they can tap into, even if it's, you know, a virtual one, and just a friend that you text to say, hey, I got my run done, how was yours? Because that I think is so important that we come together and really lift each other up through this time, because what else do we have?

There's a lot of stuff going on. So running is a positive thing, and it can transform your mood. So it's definitely worth getting out the door and doing. All right.

So those are our eight things. I'll recap them quickly. One, have options. Two, be ready to pivot and have a deadline for that. Three, train for a plateau, not a peak. Four, don't forget the bread and butter. Do the simple things. Five, work your weaknesses. Six, but experiment and try some new things. Have some fun with it. Number seven, manage those long runs a little bit differently. Get creative with those. And then lastly, know your why and know that it's much bigger than just a race or a time goal. Because running truly is a path to being a better person and not just to running faster times. And if you embrace that, I think now more than ever, then you will get a whole lot out of this training regardless of what happens with races in the fall, in the spring, anytime thereafter. And so we're encouraging you to still do the work. But yeah, make some tweaks along the way so that you can get the most out of it. Thank you, Jen, for joining me. I really appreciate it. Your perspective is always valuable, and I hope you have fun at the lake.

Thank you. Thank you, Chris.

There you go. Jen Harney, helping us digest how to think about marathon training in a pandemic. Hopefully you found that helpful, and I also hope it gives you the focus and guidance you need to keep training, because as we say, again, no matter what, if you do the work now, it will pay off down the road whether or not you can race in the fall or not. So with that, we will wrap this episode. As always, you can check us out at roguerunning.com, or follow us on Twitter, Instagram, or the Facebook at Rogue Running. Until next time, we will talk to you soon.