Hey, everybody, welcome to episode 388 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung, here with co-host James Dodds. James, how are you today?

I'm doing well. I'd say thawing out is the word of the week.

It is. Did you survive the freeze?

Yes, with no issues or blips. Lucky for me, it landed on, I guess, was it Saturday through, like, Monday. And so there wasn't, like, a high need to drive during that time. Plenty I could do at home. So safe and sound for me. What about you guys? Stay warm?

Yeah, it was all good. I think, you know, Texas is not known for its ability to withstand extreme temperatures or ice or snow. I think fortunately for us, not just me personally, but for the city, we ended up with more sleet than freezing rain, which is what they anticipated, which meant fewer branches breaking, fewer power lines failing. So it seemed like for the most part, everybody kept their power through this one, which was a pleasant change from the last big freeze that we had. And so I think that made it pretty palatable, and it was only about 48 hours that we were below freezing. No big deal. You know, you do start to get a little stir crazy, and it makes you wonder how we stayed inside for three straight years. But we managed through the weekend and we made it. I did have a little spill. I went for a run on the greenbelt on Monday, been venturing out, thinking that trail would be good because the roads were still a little bit dicey. And I did take a spill on some ice that was on a rock. And fortunately, I think I'm OK. But it was a little bit dicey out there for sure. But alas, we made it through. I did want to, before we jump in to today's topic, today's topic, we're going to talk about peaking. Peaking matters. We're on to chapter four of the book. So we're digging into this idea of peaking and how you can really only peak two max three times a year and the importance of really focusing on those peaks. So we're going to get into that. But I want to come back to a little bit of a topic that we covered in our Friday Q&A this past Friday. And if you haven't figured it out, we are doing free Q&A's on Instagram every Friday at 2 p.m. Central. If you want to jump on with us, you can ask any question of James or I. And if you want to ask questions about the book, great. If you want to ask questions about your own training, also great. We had a lot of good questions, but one of the things we were talking in the preamble to those questions, which I think ties back to our episode last week and connects into our episode today, is this idea that I was thinking about last week of expanding your comfort zone. We talk often or people talk often about getting outside your comfort zone in order to grow. But I think for us as runners, it's actually about expanding the comfort zone so that you can do more volume at comfortable paces in a way that's sustainable so that you can stay healthy doing it and therefore be consistent and then sustain the work over again, not just weeks or months but years. And so this idea of expanding your comfort zone is a little bit of a shift or turning that concept of getting outside your comfort zone on its head. But as I think back to our topic of Miles Matter, to me, that's the theme. It's really about how can I do as much volume as I can reasonably withstand and recover from so that I can get the benefit of all that volume. And what does that mean for most of us? That means expanding our comfort zone, running more easy volume, seeing how many miles we can put together if we actually slow down while doing it. And so I just wanted to get your reaction on that, see if you thought about it anymore post our Friday conversation.

Not only have I thought about it, I thought about it on today's run. So it's interesting that this popped up. I was thinking I'd bring it up just in conversation with you. So yeah, I think what it did to me was it made me think of another way of saying it is like kind of raising the baseline. Because today we'll talk about peak fitness, those like mountain top experiences. But I think what you were communicating to when you were saying expand your comfort zone was more of just how much you can easily and comfortably and rhythmically and habitually do. And it's like we were talking about those blocks of wood metaphors or blocks of ice. I took it in as you kind of describing like, well, someone who can consistently or rhythmically and smoothly run 50 mile weeks, all of a sudden now can whittle, when they do the whittling down, they can hit a lot harder qualities. So the idea for them, if they were going into a growth phase, leaving quality and peaking all of that off the table, they might put their eye towards getting to 60, to where it's just like, wait, I can do that, that's me every single day, and I feel good there. So I think of it as raising your baseline, the starting point basically, or in your language, expanding the comfort zone. And I thought of a, I've heard a psychologist talk about if you were a monkey on a limb and you were trying to grow and you wanted to go into the unknown and discover new things, you run out on the branch and then you come back into your comfort and out on the branch. But it's like extending to where your known territory is, such that a percentage becomes the undiscovered territory for growth. But we can't live out in the undiscovered name of growth forever. So we got to know how strong our limb is or what our baseline is or how big our comfort bubble.

Right.

I'm word vomiting now, but those are all the things in my mind.

Yeah. And that's the mentality I think people should have, because regardless of where they are, if they're at 10 miles a week now or 20 miles a week now, there's perhaps this perception that they can't do more or that doing more is going to be onerous or cumbersome or will break them down or will cause undue fatigue that will prevent them from being able to sustain it. But a funny thing happens when we slow down and we step into that next tier of work, is the body adapts. Again, assuming we do it the right way, assuming we do it the slow and easy and gradual way, the body adapts, and then suddenly it becomes normal. And then suddenly you're looking back at 20 miles a week. If you've built to 30, you're like, oh man, I did it. I did it. And now I'm looking at 40, thinking that could be cumbersome, but I've got a little more confidence, so I can start taking steps towards that. So it's this gradual, methodical expansion, which is led by the easy running that allows you to get to a place where the body will adapt. And I've actually found when I've done this the right way, that the body actually starts craving more. There becomes this hard to pin down or hard to put words on it, but this thing where the body actually is telling you, I want actually more of that, because we are creatures that were meant to move, we're aerobic creatures. I mean, our ancestors did subsistence hunting, where they're going out and chasing deer until they fall apart, right? And so it's in our DNA to want the volume, but we've created a world where we don't need it necessarily to survive. And so I find that when we step into those spaces, suddenly the body starts wanting it more and craving it, and then it starts to feed itself, and then you can do more and do it in a sustainable way. So it's just a little thought process to put, I think, out there for people who are worried or concerned that they can manage increased volume, or thinking that it's going to tear them down, or it's going to cause them to suddenly break. It won't. Again, if you do it in such a way that it's really easy, the body's going to adapt, those boundaries that you see will suddenly start to expand. And then before you know it, you'll be at that next tier of volume, and you'll be thinking, I feel pretty good, and I knew more. So a thought process for those out there, a little nugget you would have gotten on the Friday Q&A if you were there, but one that I wanted to bring back here, because I think, again, it touches on the Miles Matter topic from last week, but how do you actually get to increase volume in a sustainable way? And then I think it segues us into today's topic, which is peaking matters, because if you've established that big foundation, like we've talked about, then you set yourself up for the higher peak. And a part of staying in your comfort zone and doing it in a way that's sustainable is not trying to peak too much or too often or too quickly. You have to do it methodically and with the eye on the prize, so to speak, two max three races a year that you're circling on the calendar as the ones that really matter. And so it's actually as you think about getting to that peak, you're doing it in a way that is manageable and sustainable because you have the big foundation and because you're methodical about getting to the peak. You're climbing to that peak, not in a rushed way or in a way that causes you to skip steps or causes you to overwhelm the body. You're doing it in a methodical way that allows you to get to the best peak you can in that given window of time by mostly staying in your comfort zone and then suddenly you can step outside your comfort zone, perhaps on race day when it all matters. It actually makes me think about a little bit about, I don't know if you've followed any of this hubbub about Alex Honnold climbing this skyscraper in Taipei. Have you seen any of this?

Only that he did it. I didn't follow.

So we watched it. It happened to be Saturday night when the world was freezing over. So we were home, no soccer games, couldn't go anywhere. And so me and my wife and our three kids sat down and watched this live stream of Alex Honnold climbing without ropes, a skyscraper from the bottom to the top, over 100 stories, 1700 feet of climbing, all the way to the top spear of this, of this skyscraper. And he made it look so easy. Obviously, there's danger. But for him, the danger, probably by the time he did it was almost zero because of his history. And what looks scary to us and crazy to us is actually not crazy at all to him. It was actually very much in his wheelhouse, very much in his comfort zone. And so that's kind of the analogy I want to draw here, is you're trying to make the hard look easy by doing the work, doing the work consistently. And if he didn't have 35 years of climbing experience, then that would have been an exercise that would have been dangerous or outside his comfort zone in a way that would have been reckless. But with 35 years of experience and then all the preparation he put into that individual event, he could do it without really even breaking a sweat, and probably never at any point feeling like he was in danger at all. And you kind of got that sense. It looks scary from our vantage point, but it wasn't really because of all of his work and preparation. And I feel like that's a good corollary to bring into this conversation, which is that the idea is we're trying to get you to a point where you can do exactly what you're trained to do without having to take big leaps. And to do that, you need to peak appropriately. So that's my segue. I'll pause there, see if you have any comments before we get into the structure of this conversation on peaking.

I don't know that I need to make too many, because I think you set us up so well. But when you were describing it, my palms got sweaty again, because I did see the part where he was pretty much, like he was like 98% of the way, and he put his leg in, and he leaned back, and he was putting chalk.

No hands, yeah.

The commentators were like, oh, he's messing with us now. And my palms got sweaty again, just you bringing the memory back.

Yeah, he did a bat hang. They call it a bat hang, where he hung by one leg, put his hands behind his back to get chalk on his hands before he finished. Yeah, he was about, at that point, probably 15 feet from the top.

Yeah, yeah.

And what looked terrifying, but for him, probably was the most secure way to do it in the moment.

Yeah, and to your point, you had said like without his 30 years of experience, it's like, yeah, without all that experience, it actually would have literally registered as impossible in his mind. And that carries over here too. Athletes can think in their head, I could never be someone that ran 60 to 80 mile weeks, or I never thought I could break 3 hours or 4 hours or whatever barrier it is. And if you're brand new and struggling through 5K is where you're at, then sure, that might seem impossible. And I know we'll get into this as we go on, but it's like to your point of, well, you start expanding, quote, your comfort zone, i.e. what you can do regularly, then all of a sudden those out of reach goals start to seem like visible. And once they become visible, you keep inching, and then they seem within reach. So.

Yeah, and I think it kind of gets to this overarching theme of our book, and one that I tried to address a little bit in the intro. I think some people think, when we talk about slow running and easy running so much, they think that we don't have a hard or, quote, rigorous program. We're babying them in order to get them to some places below where their potential might be. And that's really not it at all. The rigor of the program is very much there. We do hard things in training. We ultimately ask you to do hard things, but never in a way that you're not prepared for. It's always the next logical step. And so that's what peeking kind of represents. What's the next logical step to build to that higher place so that I'm taking a small enough leap that it's manageable, but I'm still pushing the envelope higher. And that's what we're asking for in peeking. And it's based in obviously training theory, but there's physiological reasons for it as well. So let's speak to some of those.

The first thing that comes to mind, this is one of my favorite one-liners in the past couple years, but I like saying to athletes that you don't just go into nature, you are nature. And while on one hand, that's so obvious, it's, I think people need to be reminded of it, because I love the whole, one extreme is like I can put my mind into something and I can do anything, and then there's that other end of the complete self-limiting, like that's impossible, I never could. And it's like, well, hold on, like you said in the beginning, our bodies can change, they can get used to a certain stimulus. Basically, like we expose ourselves to some kind of stress or rigor. At first, it's daunting. We let ourselves recover, and then we get stronger because of that. And then we also have like, I got this from Dr. Jack Daniels, but there's other scientists out there, and I'm sure people have found similar information from plenty of authorities out there. But it's like even in his book, he talked about how you can expose your body to a given stimulus. The sweet spots are four to eight weeks, and that's why we often, for each of our phases, talk about six-week phases. Because it's like we know that we can't just be in a stress state at all times. Like if we, the cooking analogies all come to mind. It's like we don't want to, like if you put a cake in the oven in the first ten minutes, you would see the cake forming, and so it would make one conclude, if this was brand new science, that, oh, exposure to heat for longer moves me to where I want to go. But we also know that if we left the cake in the oven, walked out the door for 45 minutes, came back, it would be, quote, overdone. And so just like with cooking food, or just like I had a conversation recently with an athlete, and I used soil as an analogy, it was like we can't just like take a plot of land and just like hum out the harvest season week after week after week after week. No, you plant seeds, you water them, you let them grow. When it's time for harvest, you go grab it. Then you go till that soil back up so that it's fresh and nutrient-dense, and then you plant again. And our bodies, this is why I say we're not, we don't just go into nature, we are nature. Guess what? Our bodies work similarly. We can't be in that high heat, high stress, always harvesting phase at all times. We have to take the rules of science, and that's why I started bringing up Daniel's, where he's like, all right, if you expose yourself to a stimulus for less than four weeks, well, you may not get the full benefit from it. But we've also seen that past eight weeks, you start to plateau. And so that's where we got the idea of like somewhere around six weeks, where you move through like priming workouts, aerobic strength. I'm getting into the specifics now. I don't know if I should pause real quicker.

I mean, it gets us to the point of this idea of periodization, which we'll talk about as we get into the book in a lot more depth. But you have to sequence the work so that you can sequence the physiological development so that you peak on the day that matters. Typically for us, that's a 20-ish week process from start to finish. And usually people think, well, that seems really like a long period of time to be building up to one important thing. But that allows you enough time to work all those different phases so that you're stacking the cake, building the pyramid, again, whatever analogy you want to use, in a way that makes sense so that you peak when it matters. And if we talk about the physiological parts of that, what are we doing? And I'll just reference the phases for a second. We start with the base phase or the priming phase is another word we use for it. Then we go into the aerobic strength phase, then we go into the ray specific phase, then we taper. So what are we doing across each of those phases physiologically? In the base phase or the priming phase, we're building aerobic capacity, laying out that foundation of the cake or the pyramid, while also recruiting the neuromuscular communication so that when the hard work begins, fast twitch fibers are ready to go, they're ready to be activated. So you're priming, as you said, priming workouts, you're doing priming workouts to basically recruit neuromuscular communication so that when the real work starts, or we like to say, when you're fit enough to really train, then you can do that. And so then you go into the aerobic strength phase, where you're working on what we call aerobic strength, another word for that is endurance, or kind of your ability to sustain hard efforts. And we also at that time will build literal strength by doing hill work. So you're actually building muscular strength while also building aerobic strength or endurance during that phase, because that's the natural next layer of the cake. Then from there, you go into the race-specific phase where you're working on race-specific pacing, really dialing in to the physiological efforts associated with the race you're trying to achieve or accomplish, while simultaneously working on the fast and the speed range in a more rigorous way so that race pace feels easier. And then we taper, which pulls everything back, volume and typically a little bit of intensity, so that you're rested and ready to go when the race matters. And that sequence, in various forms and various durations, matters every single time. You have to go through that sequence. And when you race and when you hit that peak, you actually have to come off the peak, so the body can recover, recharge, before you can build to a higher peak. The valleys after that peak are as important as the peak itself to getting to the next mountain. And so that's what we're talking about. We go through the physiological progression as you peak, but people want to skip that or short cut it, because they think, well, I've been training year round. Do I really need to do a 20 week program for my next marathon? Or could I do a 12 week program and sort of short circuit the steps? And unfortunately, the answer to that is no. Bright, certainly not if you want to get the most out of your race. You can do it, you can do it, but are you gonna get the most out of your race? No, and you might also get hurt along the way because you're skipping steps. So we can't skip steps, and if we're not gonna skip steps, then that means it's gonna, again, it's gonna take about 20 weeks. There's 52 weeks in a year. 20 times two is 40, so that leaves us with a 20 week cycle, a 20 week cycle, and then maybe a 12 week cycle. So you can maybe squeeze in that third peak if you're doing things a little bit differently as you go across. But it's basically not more than three, and mostly I prefer two.

Well, I prefer two is, well, there's a reason why I like bringing, I brought this up recently, but humans are stacked systems. It's like, even at that point, you bump up against psychological as well as social. Just, I mean, why try to have every week of 52 weeks so ordered such that there's no room for when you might get sick or start to feel a little burnout and give yourself a little bit of space or there's holiday commitments, et cetera. And so not to get too far out of the science, but all of that starts to apply. It's like, I think two is the sweet spot because having that 12 to kind of work around logistics. And the thing is with peaking and training, we know the race dates so far out in advance too. So we're also at the mercy of like, when races are planned and then we map around them, whether that fits perfectly with our schedules or not. And so there's so many layers that start to come into play. I'm like, let's stick with two peaks a year, you know?

If you want to get the most, two peaks a year is the way to do it, but that requires patience. That also means that your development timeline expands significantly. You know, racing a couple of times a year, where it really matters, obviously you may race more than that, but two, that you're really focused on. That means your development is not just a five-week block, then you have the race of your lifetime. It's going to be five week, or sorry, 20-week block, then you have the race of your lifetime. It's a 20-week block times two, then you throw in another one. So you're looking at years. You start to put it together, because we're talking about long periods of work, months turn to years, turn to decades if you're doing this the right way. But most people struggle with that. I think it's daunting to think about it. You know, it's interesting. I think there's two sides to that coin. I'm curious what you think. On one hand, the idea that development in the sport, because of the fact that you can only peak a couple times a year, takes years. Development in this sport is daunting, because you think, wow, I've got to be doing this for three years, five years, to get the most, 10 years, 15 years. It's daunting, because it's hard to think that far ahead. I actually also find it quite encouraging, because that means whenever I start, I've got a long time where I can still improve. But it's hard to capture that and wrap your mind around that. So how do you balance that idea of short term desire with long term gains and effectiveness?

I would say I lean to the camp you lean in, that I actually find it to be more encouraging, because it's like, hey, if you've put in this effort and you got that result, then there's only more good to come, because of the way we started. In so doing, one season, you will have expanded your quote comfort zone, or you will have raised your baseline. So it lets you know that, oh, the starting point started higher this time. I'm starting off a little bit stronger. I'm starting off with more confidence, and I'm starting off with a sense of knowing, because I've done one race or ten races, etc. And so I find it ultimately encouraging. Now, the way to manage it as a coach with varying athletes, it really comes down to athlete personality, and how often, or even helping them see this, I think, starts to balance it and pull them the direction we both lean. And that's, I think sometimes people overrace, because they're kind of needing and wanting and craving those dopamine hits, those kind of like, oh my gosh, it just feels so good. And I get that, I don't want to make light of it, because all work, no play makes Jack a dull boy, right? And so it's like, I understand this need for people to quote, go get a win, but ultimately, if they try to do it too often, they'll sort of sabotage that win. So in managing that, gosh, it comes out of me in a variety of different ways, because if I see someone who's got a higher proclivity towards excitement and kind of fun things, well, then I think there's part of a strategy in just trying to, one, help them identify that in themselves and acknowledge it and say, like, okay, I think you want to schedule in an extra one or whatever. Or if, to back to your question, to center it more on your question, if they're thinking like, oh, gosh, that's going to take forever or whatever, I'm going to be so discouraged, then it's telling them on the idea of like, hey, okay, well, like, no matter where we want to go, there's a capital A and then there's that capital B at the far end. And that's like where A is where I'm at and B is where I want to go. But reminding him that little a's to little b's all along the way are those incremental steps that we take to get there. So that's when we start trying to like gamify things to keep them interested if they lean that direction where they're constantly wanting some kind of win. So it really comes down to the personality that I'm working with in order to, quote, manage that dynamic.

Yeah, but you do end up with a lot of people that start the sport that are eager, that want to get it all right now. And depending on the personality, you have to help them breathe, be patient, think long term, even though that can be hard. But it is an important part of this concept, because again, regardless of when you start, you can continue to get faster from that point for 15 up to probably about 20 years of continuous work, if you're doing things the right way. And to me, as humans, that's pretty exciting. That doesn't mean it has to all be continuous. There can be ebbs and flows in there, some seasons of life where you might have a kid or change to a rigorous job, and you might get away from it for a little bit. But then when you come back to it, it'll be right there for you. And so that's one thing we encourage people, is just think long term. And that I think then also enables you to perhaps better focus on the peaks that you have, so you optimize and maximize those opportunities when they do come. But there's a lot of fear in that. There's a lot of fear in that. So what do you think, what fear does it bring up when people think long term?

Well, I think it can create self-doubt for a lot of personalities. I would guess that half of people probably fall in this bucket. But without having exact data, etc., I know there's a good number of people that it's just, you know, they'll doubt themselves. It's sort of like you get a string of three weeks going and you're proud of yourself. People naturally, anytime, not anytime, but for a lot of people, when a good thing happens to them, they instantly think, when's the other shoe going to drop? It's a natural thing, just to be human. There's so much out of our control. So it's easy for, I think it's more psychological at this point. It's less physiological, because physiologically, we already know that, yeah, you expose it to the stress, you'll adapt, eventually you get stronger. So our body's actually showing us that, no, the more you do this, the better you get. So I think it's more psychological that just people are like, I don't know how long I can maintain this, or there's so many variables at play. And then there's just good old-fashioned impatience. Like you said, when someone starts out, it's pretty scary for me often, because I'm like, man, that's when they're the most motivated, but they're the least developed, right? And so they'll go do something wild and then overstress their system and then face a big setback. So I think it's fear, self-doubts.

There's also this idea that, well, it's an insecurity around when you get to that feeling like you're fit, and you're ready to peak, and you know you've got a result in front of you, or you get that result, then there's this idea that you want to hold on to that, and you don't ever want to let it go. So there's this fear that it'll never come back. And that goes with this ebb and flow of peaking. I mean, I've had, just had some runners finish Houston earlier this month, and they're in there. We do a three week recovery protocol, and they build back gradually with some easy volume over three weeks, as you should if you've just run a marathon. But inevitably, you feel completely out of shape while doing it. You went from just running, in many cases, for those that ran Houston this year, a PR, a big PR. I have one, you know, first Boston qualifier, who was struggling on three mile easy runs right now, wondering, where did all the fitness go? And so then there's this fear that you'll never get it back. And you have to have faith that that recovery process, that de-training is an important part of your body's ability to re-adapt, then to build to a higher place. But it's hard to overcome the fear that, hey, maybe it'll never come back if it went that quickly. And it didn't really leave, but it just, your ability to manifest it goes away because your muscles are spent, your bodies are covering. But there's great fear in that ebb and flow.

Oh, totally. I'm managing some folks through a de-train to re-train phase right now as well. But your body starts to go heal itself. And then, yeah, there is, again, back to that fear or that psychological, like, oh, man, it takes a lot of work to get up a mountain, so no one ever wants to leave it because it's sort of like they know how hard the climb is. Right? And so I can relate to that. But this is where I use, like, I think we forget how taxing race day itself is. Like, to go get that peak in PR, not only is there the taxing nature of the entire season, where we're, and we talk about, like, cumulative fatigue through the season, it usually shows up kind of late aerobic strength or early race-specific phase, because that's when miles are high and the workouts are rigorous. And, you know, I'll talk to athletes about cumulative fatigue, and in those moments, they're like, makes complete sense, right? They understand that the work's stacking on itself. Well, then zoom out just one layer more. And it's like, there's the cumulative fatigue of the whole season and the race, and so we know we have to come down. But when it's hard to go through it, that's when I like to think of fighting analogies, because when you look at UFC fighters and stuff, even the guy that wins is often like... Or Rocky's a great example, like the Rocky one where he's beat to a pulp, and it's some inspiring movie, and yet he looks like he's just run over by a train, right? And yet we know all of that heals if you give it the time to heal. And so allowing all that inflammation to subside and just reminding yourself that you are part of nature, and that you are organic tissue, and that all of this will kind of readjust and put you back in a clean, smooth spot where then you'll have to employ your disciplined mind again and build up. You know, you could, quote, do it, and plenty of people come through it. But it's just in that window, the feeling. I always say, like, be careful of forever thinking. Like, this is not forever. It's just this window of time where you got to let everything heal.

And it's hard. But I'll remind people something we said in one of the earlier episodes from the book. Fitness building happens in recovery. You don't get fitter doing the work directly. You get fitter recovering from the work. And on a macro level, that's true after peaking for a big race. You don't get fitter going right back into it after a big race. You get fitter because you're appropriately recovering from that peak so that then the body can really kind of absorb and assimilate everything you just did over five months. So on a macro scale, it's like a recovery day, essentially, but over three weeks for a marathon or one, two weeks for a half, where the body's assimilating all of that work, recovering from it too, but assimilating all of that work so that when you go back through the peaking process, it can summit it and then summon more. So that's one way to think about it, but I know it can be difficult. And so there's a lot of kind of fear and uncertainty, and some of this is about having faith. But then the next question kind of becomes, well, how do I peak appropriately? And how do I, can I peak too soon? Can I prevent this idea of peaking too soon? And so throughout a training cycle, you're going through this periodization process where you're always riding a fine line, and you can easily go over that line and overdo it, peak too soon, feel like you've raced before the big race, and that's something you have to be cognizant of. In one way, I like people to think about this, and the short answer is yes, you can peak too soon. We'll talk about what that looks like here in a second. But what does it look like to peak appropriately? I want to cover that first, which is that peaking appropriately means measuring your work, measuring how you control your work, measuring how far you are from the edge, as you go through the phases of training, so that it's not until really you get into that race-specific phase, maybe even only the final three or four weeks of that race-specific phase, where you're truly tiptoeing to the edge. The rest of the time you're staying away from it. And I have a whole episode on this. I think the idea of peaking is both a physiological response to the training, meaning some of it's programmed. Naturally, the training gets harder as you go, and so as it gets harder, the body kind of heightens its awareness and understands that there's something bigger coming because you're building to this peak. So, there's part of it that's programmed, but then there's part of it, to me, that's a choice. You get to choose and decide how close to the edge you go. And the goal in the base phase, in the aerobic strength phase, is to stay as far away from the edge as possible. When in doubt, choose easier paths. Go slower on a rep. Go fewer reps. Take the conservative choice whenever you have it in those first couple of phases of training. Then you get in to that race-specific phase, and maybe even at the beginning of that, you're starting to still make some conservative choices. But when you get to that final three or four weeks of that phase where everything's coming together, you're doing your hardest workouts, your biggest mileage, that's when you can tiptoe to the edge and say, okay, for these three or four weeks, I'm going to be dialed in. But only for those three or four weeks before you taper. And so it's as much a choice as it is anything else. Because if you go into the first couple of phases and you're always going to the edge and you're pushing hard and doing max reps and when in doubt you're going harder, when you think you have extra left, you're going to peak too soon. And so again, there's a physiological component of this that's programmed into the training with a good coach. And there's part of this that's a choice.

Yep. And that's also how we go about not only planning those quality workouts, but also like quality long runs. Because all of that's going to signal to the body, hey, the peak's coming. Like this is the peak now. And so we do it, we come out of that. When we taper, our body starts to repair, so we're our freshest and healthiest on race day. Because in my mind, I'm like, I think it's easy to translate to an athlete that you run your best race when you're your freshest and healthiest, right? Assuming you did all your training. And so that helps explain the taper. And then it's just, I feel like again, to quote Lydia, like it helped me understand it so cleanly, at least on the baseline level, when I learned to look at the race day and work backwards. Because then the argument made sense. It was like, if I'm going to do 26 miles at this pace, well, I'm going to need to be fresh and healthy. And before that, I want to know I've done my hardest work. I've hit my fastest paces. And we know I brought up the six weeks earlier, so we have about six weeks of that. Well, how do I know I can hit my fastest paces? I need those six weeks of aerobic strength. I need to know I'm strong enough to hit those. Well, how do I know I'm ready for aerobic strength workouts? Well, I need to make sure I've been primed, i.e. I have a good base. And so it's like running it backwards. I know I was repetitive, but running it backwards almost helps it just go, oh, I don't know why that feels so obvious now. And then on the front end of the program, you can trust it a little more and patiently pursue that, Pete.

Right. Yeah, but it's hard. It's hard to stay patient throughout. I think it also takes practice kind of knowing where your line is as you execute on these training programs. But there will be signs. So what are the signs that someone is is peeking too soon or maybe going a little bit beyond where they should be as they approach that peak?

Sadly, sometimes, and this is more rare because I don't want to create any fear. I think sometimes people look at it as a mystical concept and almost like, but how do I know I'm not peeking? So I brought that up, even though I'm about to create a little bit of it. But every now and then, and I'm talking like less than five percent of the time, you start to see this burnout come over people and they just sort of have lost their edge and lost that ability to quote make the choice and push because they're just kind of burnout. And it's like, wait, well, we've still got those four healthy weeks. It's, you know, I always try to meet people where they are. So I want to give them the benefit of the doubt. And maybe it's like, well, hey, we were asking you if you're controlling the aerobic strength phase and in those workouts and were you on top of it? And maybe they thought they were, but they actually were pushing. So usually that like extreme burnout where it's sort of like there is no left in me.

Yeah, you lose that mental ability to go. You sort of, you just feel blah. And you're like, I don't want to do it anymore.

Yeah.

Which is both a mental component, but also a physical response.

Yeah, because that's the whole, that's the endocrine system. That's the hormonal part. It's like, you know, people, like, it's funny, because all of it's so interconnected, but it's like, yes, it's mental, and it's also physiological. Like, your hormones actually do matter. And that's one way to know. I call it the molasses glaze, because it's almost like that sort of dark, dim light fades over what you see in a slow-like manner. There's classic, like, niggles and nuggles, where it's sort of like, dang, I felt really comfortable at those paces, but now everything's starting to, quote, break down. And then, of course, heart rate, like resting heart rate, is the biggest. Just, I'm not one that's into, like, gearing gadgets very much. I have my garment, and that's about it. But where was I going with that? Oh, just knowing, like, if you're waking up, and it just feels like, like most people may not know what their cortisol levels are, but they do know if they feel like they wake up in a stress state, like, regularly. And if a couple good nights of good rest or an easy day jog with, like, follow maybe by a day off, if something that simple doesn't start to cure some of that, then you might be in a state of just, quote, feeling overtrained or perhaps peak too soon.

Yeah, and I think oftentimes, I mean, going back to wrestling heart rate, I mean, it'll be visible there. And we give other metrics in the book that you can look to if you are into the data and into tracking everything. But I think wrestling heart rate is one of the best ones. Generally, what I observe with wrestling heart rate is that you'll see, as you get fit, you'll see a natural decline in wrestling heart rate as you get fitter. So that's normal. But then when you're in that really heavy phase of work, you might end up seeing that your overnight wrestling heart rate might be five beats north of what you would expect it to be because of all the rigor of the work and the repair that's happening inside you overnight. But if it goes beyond that to 10 beats higher than normal, or even eight, seven, eight beats higher than normal, that's a sign that, hey, we've overstressed the system. And so it can be an early warning sign. You know, the bands and the rings, aurora rings and all those things, you know, they use some of these data points that we talk about in the book, like resting heart rate, heart rate variability to indicate whether or not things are going haywire in the system. And so those are all early warning signs for, I've run myself ragged and I've peak too soon. But I think oftentimes those pair with general feelings of fatigue, lack of motivation, workouts that are consistently going poorly, not one bad workout, because that happens, but we're talking two, three, four workouts in a row that aren't going well. Recovery days that just feel like an absolute slog. There's a coach I won't mention by name, but they talk about this idea, or have talked about this idea on social, about how marathon training, at the end of it, you should be falling asleep in your cereal. That's how hard it is, you know, in the final phase of training. And I just don't fundamentally believe that. I think if that's the state you're in, you've actually pushed it too far. You should be feeling like you're worked, and definitely tired and fatigued at times, but you should have total control over what's happening. And if you're falling asleep in your cereal, your resting heart rate's out of control, if you're lacking in motivation, then that's a sign that you've overdone it. Can you come back from that? Maybe, maybe not. It can be difficult once you've kind of pushed beyond the peak, because, as we've talked about, you get to a peak for a reason and then you slide over the back side of it, it's hard to go back to the top. And so it's sort of a delicate balance if you get to that place. But usually what you need in that moment is to back way off for at least a window of time. Call it a week, maybe a week and a half, where you're running but you're pulling back on quality, you're pulling back on total volume, you're trying to do things that spark curiosity and interest again and to get the mind going. And so it's possible you might be able to save it if you do something like that. But if you don't, then there's probably no hope either way. So you've got to at least try. But this is all an exercise in kind of learning how this works over time. And as we talked about at the top of the episode of Expanding Your Comfort Zone, most of your work should be absolutely in control. You should be staying away from the edge until that last bit of work. And even in that last bit of work in the peak phase, where you might have three or four big weeks, that's where we, I'll tell my athletes, circle that on your calendar. That's where everything else falls away. You prioritize running and running primarily. Obviously, you still have your job and your kids and your family and all that stuff. But you let your partner know that, hey, this is a window of time that I'm going to need to create extra space for my training. And it might only be six weeks a year. But those are important six weeks to crowd out all the other noise, get extra sleep, don't go out with your friends. You get to be boring for a little bit so that you can put all energy and recovery towards the thing that matters in those windows of time when you're on the edge. And then outside of that, you can be looser with it. So that's a long way of getting to this point of you can overdo it and there's a learning process to do it the right way. But it generally starts by staying away from the edge for as long as possible. And when in doubt, probably still staying away from the edge, especially if you're new. Because why? I mean, you're going to be reaching much higher peaks down the road. So why risk being healthy on a start line and ready to go for trying to squeeze a few extra seconds out if you're not sure, right? So I'm generally in favor of people, especially newer athletes, winning out choosing the easier path at all points and then let the training actually dictate the peak.

Yeah, yeah. I was also going to say when you were talking about signs of like fatigue and over training and peaking too soon, like, and realizing like, oh, maybe you take a week and sort of come out of that, and maybe you can get back to it. I was thinking of our training programs and every third week we use a down week for the if if the if the athletes lean into how much we say the word effort and how much we say listen to your body, then they can start gaining that awareness even when they kick off a training program just in their down weeks. Like, I try to communicate that even with my one-to-one athletes often where if we're in the first week, then I expect it to be a challenge, but one they're fully in control of. In the second one, that still applies, but I give them a heads up. I'm like, you're probably going to feel a little more fatigued this week, and you're going to try to compare to last week, and it's not going to be apples to apples, not perfectly. So if there's slight fatigue, et cetera, then that's okay. Like you knew that was coming, so you're doing your best, but you're not quote over, going over the edge. And then boom, they get that down week, and they're going to recover, decompress, and absorb all that training. And I hope that's when they're paying attention to their body. I mean, I hope they're paying attention at all times, but those are good checkpoints to go in, take inventory, and double check, like, okay, I'm good, I'm recovering this week. I know I'm doing it right. And then you could take all that into the next two up weeks again. So the training allows for plenty of checkpoints.

Checkpoints and space for that kind of thing, because I also think about, well, if you're starting to feel like you're overcooked, I'll use my last week as an example. You know, I raced 3M, or Boston International Half, formerly known as 3M, on Sunday, then had a big mileage week as I'm preparing for a race in March, the stage race that I'm preparing for. I was tired from running harder than I've run in a long time at Austin International Half. Still had a big mileage week in front of me. What did that mean? That meant those miles were slower than probably have done all training block. Because that's what I needed to do in order to get in the work. And that meant to up to even 5 minutes slower than the race, the pace I might choose for race day. And yet, that's what the body was asking for in order to still put in the work that I needed to do to get the result that I want. And yes, I could have made the decision to pull back on some of that volume I could have. But I felt like I was okay proceeding with it as long as I slowed down and backed off. And then obviously I was checking in with myself along the way. So it just goes to show you that there are plenty of ways to expand the comfort zone. Slow down on your easy runs, you know, choose fewer reps and a workout, whatever it may be. And you just have to be willing to pull those levers. And if you're willing to pull those levers rather than just wrote following the paces that you always do, then you're going to have the ability to adapt and recover appropriately, and still get to that peak the way you want to. But you can't blindly just go through it, go through it all without listening. And that's one of the reasons why we talked about listening to your body and understanding effort and all of those things is so, so important, because if you're in tune with that, then it allows you the flexibility to still do a lot of work while managing the effort appropriately. So, with that, I want to wrap this with a question. Why is it so hard for people to embrace the idea of peaking? And what would you say to that person who's struggling to embrace this idea of two races a year that really matter?

Well, I've never been good at coming after it with a direct statement. My approach, especially, whether it was a group of athletes that I could speak to, well, I can still present it here. I would actually go into WhyWork. Like, hey, why are you doing, not just WhyWork. I'd be curious to know, what do you really want out of this? Like, what are we doing here? Because if you really, like, if you tell me that you want to optimize your training or maximize your training, people love that, especially on the front end of a block, then I'm like, okay, well, we know how, but it's going to take like 20 to sometimes 24 weeks, right? Like, it's going to be a long process. And so, if they can't buckle up for the long ride of 24 weeks, and I don't mean buckle up because it's all going to be wild and crazy, yes, there will be tough parts, just like race day. Like, your first 10 miles aren't that hard in a marathon. Sure, the last 10, you better buckle up, like, yeah, for that. But I'm like, if we know the pathway ahead, like, I would have to dig in and find is it just like, they haven't learned to manage that side of themselves that loves overstimulation, which again, I'd relate to. I get that. I'm like, I'm not putting down any of this, but I would want to uncover, is it that? Or is it just, yeah, a matter of trust? Like, it's so hard to trust. Is it classic impatience? I don't know. I'd have to ask the question back to them of like, what are you up to? What do you really want out of this? And why is it when the path is laid out, you keep on to jump off the path?

I think you're speaking to the fact that I think for some people, the reason they're unwilling to trust this kind of concept is because they're afraid that if they do and it doesn't work or they don't get the result, then it will reveal that they're inadequate. So there's this insecurity that comes with it. Well, if I put all my eggs in the basket and then the eggs are smashed in the head, does that mean I'm just not good enough? So it's a little bit of this idea of they're afraid to trust because if they do trust the idea and the concept exposes them to the max potentially. Now, we know that there are training results and race results. Sometimes they sing a happy song. Sometimes they don't. If you don't get the race result you want, does it mean you're not good enough? No. So we know all of that, but I think that's part of it. It's just that inability to trust and therefore then put everything on the line, truly. And so I would ask the listener a question, who hasn't yet embraced this concept, why not give it a shot? What do you have to lose? Let's see what happens when you put all of your eggs in two baskets this year in 2026. Because I promise you, you'll get more out of your training and potentially also more out of the results. And if not in this year, in next year or the year after. So why not give it a shot, guys? All right, we'll wrap this episode. A couple of reminders. You can get the book if you go to our Instagram page at Rogue Running. There are links in the bio if you want to pick it up. You don't have to to follow along in these episodes, but we do think it will be helpful. You can join us on Fridays at 2 p.m. Central on our Instagram page at Rogue Running if you have questions or want to ask about your own training. And of course, you can always check out our training options at roguerunning.com. So we'll wrap this one here. As always, go check us out at those channels, roguerunning.com and at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.