Hey everybody, it is episode 117 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is Chris coming at you from Austin, Texas. Since I just released a Friday special edition episode on current events, we're gonna be jumping quickly into my discussion today. With today's guest, I've got on Alex Hutchinson again, who has been with me several times. He is, of course, of Outside Magazine's columns, Sweat Science, Fame, and also wrote the book Endure on basically figuring out where our limits might be as humans. And Alex has now been, this will be his fifth show, he's been on episode 48, 64, 81, and most recently on episode 110 with Christy Ashwanden talking about her new book, Good to Go. And I got several good audience emails and comments about Christy and Alex going head to head on the topic of hydration and whether or not drinking to thirst is a sufficient way to manage your hydration in an endurance event. So that was a fascinating discussion. We're gonna redux that today with just Alex. But what I wanted to do with today's episode with Alex is basically to do what I'm gonna call a sweat science smorgasbord, basically. I went through a bunch of his articles from his sweat science column through the years and of course emphasizing many of his recent columns. And I just wanted to drill in on some of those and get the science on running from him in a lot of different areas. So we actually start this interview talking about some current events, getting his predictions on Elliot Kipchoge in London versus Mo Farah. But then we cover off on a host of interesting other things such as how the 4% shoes from Nike actually work to lots of different little pieces of running form, including how running form for the elite athlete can teach some of us everyday runners how to have better running form. To talking about skiing across Antarctica like Colin O'Brady recently did and Alex recently interviewed him before his expedition to ski across Antarctica in 54 days, unsupported. So we cover a lot of interesting things. And so with that, we will go ahead and bring Alex onto the show. All right, welcome Alex Hutchinson back to the show. How are you doing today, Alex?

Doing well, Chris. Thanks for having me back on.

Yeah, you're now a five time guest, which is pretty awesome.

Hopefully climbing up the leaderboard.

How's the weather in the great north?

It's not as cold as I would like, to be honest, because every time it gets up around the freezing mark, we get massive sheets of ice covering my entire lengthy driveway. So it's, yeah, it's cold, but actually less cold than I would like.

Interesting. So you root for it to be a little colder.

Minus three is infinitely preferable to plus 0.5. I'm talking Celsius, minus whatever you say. 30 is far better than the 33.

33, got it. Yeah, we don't have to face that very often. Usually we're rooting against the cold. And in fact, last week we had, I think it was 91 degrees at the airport. We set a record high for a February day. Pretty nuts. So, all right, let's jump in here. And I wanna start by talking about my favorite topic with you, because we haven't talked about this since it happened, which is one of our favorite athletes, Elliot Kipchoge. We haven't talked about his world record since the world record, at least not, I don't think we've talked about it on the podcast at least. So I wanted to start there with him. Also get your predictions for London. What were your reactions to watching Berlin?

Yeah, it was like wish fulfillment, dreams coming true like this is what I dreamed could happen. It could happen, it's actually happening. And very few of my dreams, even those related to other people come true. So, it was great, it was aside from getting up at 3.30 in the morning, it was awesome. And it was, for me, the big thing was like thinking to what I'd thought would happen after the Breaking Two race in 2017. I actually wrote a big op-ed for the New York Times that fall before the Berlin Marathon in 2017, saying, I really think everything has changed now that Kipchoge has run this sort of artificial aided to 0-0-25 in the Nike race. I think he's gonna run like 2-0-1, it's in print. That's what I thought would happen. Then of course, Berlin 2017.

You were a year early.

Yeah, exactly. So, I've been telling everyone, I called it, I predicted it, I was just a year off, that's all. But it was hot in Berlin in 2017, or it was rainy rather in Berlin in 2017, it was hot in London in 2018. So Berlin 2018 was his first crack in decent conditions since Breaking Two. And he did, I won't say it's what I expected, it's what I thought could be possible in an amazing, wonderful day. And so, yeah, it was really exciting to see that because five years ago, how many people on this planet would have said they expected someone to run 201, however many asterisks you want to put for shoes and things like that. It's just, it's crazy to see.

It's amazing. It was also amazing just to see what seemed like the relative ease of it for him at the end. He was just flying on by himself. And that was the most remarkable part for me.

You never want to, you know, assume you know what someone is feeling like in their head, but it was certainly seeing him cross the finish line and then, you know, seemingly, actually accelerate to run towards, to give his coach a big hug and to leap into the air. It's like, wow, I don't remember. You don't see a lot of people looking that chipper after a race, let alone a race like that. So, you know, we can, I guess we'll get to the prediction section, but I don't know that it means he's going to run faster in the future, but it was certainly, yeah, it didn't look like he was, you know, at the absolute scraping the bottom of the barrel of what he might be capable of.

Yeah. The other thing that struck me after watching it was it just seemed like the difference between him and everybody else now is seemingly insurmountable, even at his quote unquote age, whatever that actually may be.

Yeah, I think that's an interesting point because, you know, as you know, there's been lots of discussion and debate about the shoes he wears, the Nike Vapor Fly 4% or whatever equivalent he wears. And, you know, is he really just a 204 guy who's gotten lucky to be flourishing right when these shoes have come out? And so I did a big analysis, I don't know, a month or two ago, looking at the trends in top 100 marathon times over the last decade or so, trying to understand, is it just like, is everyone way, way, way faster now? Or is it just Kipchoge? And what really jumps out at you when you look at the times is Kipchoge's time in Berlin last fall is just totally out of step with what the rest of the world is doing. So it's not like everybody suddenly got three minutes faster. The shoes are doing something, but if the shoes were really the secret behind Kipchoge, you'd see a whole bunch of other people running, if not 201, then at least 202 or 203. And you don't see that. So yeah, whatever's happening, he is not playing with the same tools that everyone else is playing. Somehow he's head and shoulders above everybody else.

It seems like he's a true master of the marathon, and it seems like there are others that aren't willing to become a true master. I don't know if it's something that happens perhaps, I speculate that sometimes with the East African runners because they come from an impoverished place, when they get a big victory, and then the money that comes with that and the fame and perhaps the fortune in their world, that then it changes their dynamic in that they get distracted and lose their way, and a lot of them might have early positive and strong results, but then fade. You see it happening where they fade fairly quickly or can't reproduce maybe those initial results that they have in their debut or their second marathon. So I don't know if that's part of it. And Kipchoge just seems immune to that sort of thing. He's just the guy who's cleaning the bathrooms anyway, training camp or whatever it may be, or if he just has figured out a secret sauce that nobody else has.

Yeah, you know, what you say is very true that there's a longstanding pattern of early success and guys like Sammy Wanjuru, whose story was of course very sad that he became successful, won the Olympics and then was having a drinking problem, couldn't stay in shape and eventually died in a drunken fall off a balcony. But there's a lot more or less dramatic cases of guys who just, they get 100, 000 bucks. I mean, they're set for life and who can blame them? The life of a marathoner is really, really hard. And so it is almost sort of mystifying to see that Kipchoge has seemingly really kept the hunger that he's still really internally driven. And he certainly came from a poor background and I'm sure was motivated to change his life. But he's obviously, that's not what it's about for him. He's pushing for something deeper because man, for a guy who has as much money, and he's not just rich on a Kenyan scale, like he's obviously, he's well off no matter where he wants to live and yet he's spending five days a week in this austere training camp. So yeah, and that sort of points to the question of what comes next because it's hard to imagine how he can summon up the hunger to train as hard as he will need to train to do anything better than what he's done already.

Right. And he has people that are theoretically hungry to take that spot. We've got London coming up, everybody's talking about the Mo Farah versus Kipchoge rematch. Obviously, Kipchoge dispatched him fairly handily last year in London, although I think people were impressed by Farah's result and his ability to hang tough on a hot day. I don't really see a scenario where Farah can challenge Kipchoge. I think they're still in different leagues, but do you think Farah is a step closer? Do you think there's a threat that Kipchoge could get knocked off this time?

I think Farah looked good in Chicago and is learning the marathon ropes. Probably most importantly has had a few marathon buildups under his belt now, isn't pretending, isn't still trying to do 10, 000 meter training or 5, 000 meter training. So Farah may be getting better, but honestly, I wouldn't necessarily. The number of people who are like exceptional, exceptional track runners who then are also exceptional, exceptional marathon runners is relatively small, I think. Maybe someone will challenge me on that, but I think I wouldn't necessarily expect Farah to be the one who could push an in-form Kipchoge. If anyone, it would be one of the young Kenyan guys, possibly even some or Ethiopian, but there's always new young guys coming out who are hungry and surprise people. It wouldn't surprise me if Kipchoge lost. If the question is, will someone in the field beat Kipchoge, I'd say the odds are maybe 50-50. If you ask me to name a specific person who will beat Kipchoge, I don't think anyone has a good chance, but I think when you add up all the various people who will be there and all the things that could go right or wrong for Kipchoge, there's definitely a good chance he'll lose in the marathon. I don't necessarily think Farah is the guy I would put my money on.

He's only lost once, Alex. Can we use that statistical? The past is our stats.

That proves it.

Right? But you're right, it's like Adola in 2017, nobody knew who Adola was, GA. Adola.

And he's not done nothing since, right?

And he's done nothing since, but he challenged Kipchoge on that day. We thought maybe there's a chance he might lose, and then of course he prevailed. So I think you're right, it's more likely a debutante for one of these Ethiopians from the Dubai Marathon or something who's not afraid to go out at a blistering fast pace and just hang on for dear life.

Yeah, and it may not be a debutante, like I said, it may be someone who's run 204, 205, and there are a lot of those guys out there who's, you know, I'm a fan of the sport, but I can't name every 204 guy from the last few years. There's a bunch of guys who wouldn't have to make that big a leap to get down into 203 range where Kipchoge might be vulnerable.

The crazy thing to me, though, in all of it and just something I try to think and apply in my own running and coaching is the marathon is a hard thing to master. It's also hard to be consistent with the marathon because of the variables, the weather, you know, you have a bad day, something doesn't sit right in the nutrition you take. There's a lot of things that can go wrong that might appear to be out of your control. Kipchoge seems to be immune to those things. He just seems to be able to consistently win and generally run within a fairly tight range of paces without fail. It's unbelievable.

Yeah. And, you know, we can bet against him and eventually we'll be right. I mean, that's just the way it works. But he, you know, he's I don't think he's immune to the laws of laws of the marathon or the laws of probability or the laws of time. But yeah, his streak is pretty much unprecedented. And so maybe part of that is that he's been a, you know, he's been a 201 guy winning races in 203, 204. And so he hasn't had to, you know, at the halfway mark, he hasn't been pushed as close to his limits as some of the other guys. Or maybe he's, you know, he's obviously just a, he has the mindset and he's talented and he's trained hard and he hasn't gotten injury, hasn't had injury problems. Who knows how long that street can last because we, you know, nothing lasts forever. But yeah, it's, with every passing marathon, I think, well, he's going to have to have a rough one eventually. But who knows when that is.

He's kind of, I use the comparison. He's like the Usain Bolt of marathoning, basically, for whatever reason. Bolt obviously had a unique skill set genetically and from a stature standpoint in the hundred meters and the 200 meters. Kipchoge has that for the marathon.

Yeah, and it's maybe not as obvious what it is about Kipchoge that does it. But there's something about who he is and how he trains and how he prepares that really has him, he has this dialed in where the marathon is no longer this sort of mythical beast where you only succeed one out of every three times. He's going out and doing, it's not like he's never had anything gone wrong. He had that year in Berlin where his insoles came out and he ran the whole race with the insoles flapping like wings, and he still ran 204 flat. So we know he's been in much better shape than that for a number of years now. And he's had challenges like with for Medola. Just like Bolt, Bolt kept winning and winning and winning, but sometimes the wins were very, very narrow. So there's that something that's sort of hard to measure sort of winner factor where he manages to pull it out even when it's tight.

I still want to see him race Boston or New York without Pacers on a more challenging course and see what that would do for him. I'm sure he would still show his dominance in a different way, but that's to me more interesting than seeing him go run faster than a 201.

Yeah, I'm not sure I would be on your side on that one, but for him to run a 201, I would sacrifice 1, 000 Bostons and 10, 000 New Yorks for him to shave off two seconds off his world record.

Interesting.

All right.

Well, we'll agree to disagree there. Now, I want to use that as a segue to talk about the 4% shoes. You recently did an article on what makes them better, what makes them faster because there was a study recently that kind of decomposed the effects of the 4% and broke that down into what was actually causing it, which was really, really interesting. And I know there's not fully definitive conclusions, but I was sitting there, I ran California International Marathon in December, looking around at those around me at the start line. They were all going to be running somewhere between 240 and 250. Man, probably 80% had those shoes on. So it was a sea of that kind of pinkish orange that the 4% is known for. And I was sitting there wearing my Adidas Adios Boost, the competitive and, as the studies say, less effective energy return shoe than those competitors around me. But this study said it wasn't the carbon fiber plate everybody thought it was. It was actually, it's actually the foam. So talk about that because that to me is a conclusion I didn't expect.

Yeah. And like you said, we all of this stuff is still speculative and taking little bits of data and trying to figure out what it is that makes the shoe special. But it's been it's been clear all along that the foam that Nike has, this Zumax foam is extremely special. It's very, very resilient and very, very light. And the light weight is important because it means you can you can stack a big wedge of this foam there without paying the usual penalty that usually usually if you have a nice thick shoe for a marathon, it's heavy. And so you're going to run slower because you're pulling more weight around. So the combination of lightness and the resilience when you squeeze it down, it it gives you back something like 90% of the energy that you've put in to squeeze it down compared to, I can't remember, you know, 75 or 80% for the boost foam and far less than that for most foams. So the foam was always going to be special. The question was what is the role of the carbon fiber plate? And most people have been thinking about the carbon fiber plate as a spring, right? Like you're running on spring loaded shoes. And that was really, to be honest, a series of sort of misunderstandings and poor reporting. So there was a Nike patent for a spring loaded shoe that came out around the same time as the Vapor Fly, and people assumed that it was the patent for the Vapor Fly. And they were wrong. It was a totally different shoe. It was a curved carbon fiber plate that curved in a completely different direction to make a spring. And so anyway, all of which is prefaced to say that the results of this new study from the University of Colorado weren't totally surprising, but they went against the narrative that had got hold about what made the shoe special. And they did a bunch of material testing and then they did a bunch of biomechanical tests, really, really careful 3D motion analysis, putting markers all over the shoe and all over runner's legs to see what the forces were. When you're running on the shoe, how much does the shoe bend in what direction? And then we can figure out where is the energy being stored and returned. And their basic conclusion was, yeah, the carbon fiber plate bends and springs back a tiny bit, but the foam compresses and springs back and gives you about 50 times more energy than the plate. So, the real source of any energy return, just like in the Boost, is the foam. Now, the question is, okay, so what's the carbon fiber plate all about? Is it just a sales gimmick or what? And what the Colorado researchers figured when I asked them, like I said, well, could you just have a shoe full of foam then? And they said, well, it would be awfully hard to corner on a big 35-millimeter stack soft foam shoe without that stiffening element, and it gives it some stability. So it may be as simple as that. There may also be a little bit of energy savings from things like preventing your toe joint from bending because mostly when you're running, you have various joints bending like your ankle, for instance, bends, and that stretches your Achilles tendon, which functions like an elastic, and when you push off, it sort of snaps back and you get some of that energy back. But when your toe bends, it only unbends when you're in the air, so you're not pushing off from your toe as your toe unbends. And so toe bending energy is generally wasted, and the carbon fiber plate prevents that toe from bending. So you might get a little bit of energy savings there. So I realize I'm sort of saying a lot of different things and going in 50 different directions at once, because it is complicated, and there's a lot of stuff going on, and it's hard to figure out exactly what's what. But in terms of what makes the shoe special, these results tend to support the narrative that it's really the foam and the idea of having a thick wedge of foam more than the carbon fiber plate that matters.

Yeah, it's fascinating because I know that there's a lot of copycat shoes coming. I believe Brooks has one in the works, Hoka has one that was launched, I believe, earlier this year for the Houston half where Jim Walms, he was wearing it with a racer with a carbon fiber plate. And so it seems like the copycat versions are focusing on the plate versus the foam, which means that if you're getting, if you're thinking you can take your favorite brand and pick up their copycat version and still get the same effect as the Nike 4%, you might be wrong.

Yeah, I mean, we'll see, I guess. And I assume that these companies have done their own testing and presumably they've made sure that their shoe does something. Maybe the carbon fiber plate allows each of the companies to put in a thicker layer of foam and to have this sort of similar geometry. And maybe they don't get all of the same resilience and all of the same weight benefits as the Zoom X foam does. But if they're using new, there's the PMAX foams or whatever, there's these various fancy new foams coming online. But it's more of a shift in the general geometry of the shoe away from ultra-light thin paper sold flats to a thicker, more cushioned shoe. Maybe that's going to be beneficial even if the foam doesn't have quite the same characteristics as the Nike foam. Because there's other considerations too that are harder to quantify in these tests. One of the anecdotal reports are that people, their legs don't feel as beat up towards the end of a marathon. So if you're someone like me who ends up with kind of muscle damage and soreness after when you're running for a long period of time, that could be as big a factor as any change in efficiency. If running instead of in a racing flat, if you're running in a nice thick cushioned shoe that's not too heavy, maybe that's what's going to help marathon times most is having that extra cushioning without paying the weight penalty. And maybe the carbon fiber plate allows you to do that without having a big sort of marshmallow of a shoe.

Yeah. One thing that struck me in reading your article and some of the hypotheses going in about what might happen in the study, it also struck me that I think Nike sort of stumbled upon this almost by accident in a sense that they don't really know why their shoe worked, but they found a shoe that worked and it seemed to be constructed in a way that works even though the effects they were maybe trying to create with the plate and the way it was structured and the foam and how thick it was and all those things weren't necessarily intended outcomes, but ultimately it all came together in this sort of perfect storm that does give this benefit, which seems to be a pretty definitive benefit, but it was almost in spite of what Nike thought would happen instead of because of what they thought would happen.

Yeah, I mean, ultimately we don't know what Nike knows. They're very secretive. So they had their external testing done by a group, Roger Cram's group at the University of Colorado. Roger Cram is a paid consultant for Nike, but he's a professor at the University of Colorado, so he does this sort of external testing, but he doesn't have, and he collaborated with some of the Nike scientists, but he doesn't have access to the testing that they did internally. So when I spoke to him, it's like, well, okay, wouldn't it be sort of obvious, surely they could just give you a shoe that has the same geometry but without the carbon fiber plate, and then a shoe that has the carbon fiber plate but with a different kind of foam that's less resilient and heavier, and then you'd know how much is the foam and how much is the plate. And he was basically like, yeah, of course, but they won't give me those shoes. They don't make those shoes. So he wasn't able to test the components independently. And I would be shocked if Nike hasn't run that test. Let's see what this shoe with this foam but without a carbon fiber plate. Let's see what it does. I would be shocked if they haven't done that test, but they have managed to keep, if they have, they've managed to keep the results totally under the radar. So that hasn't leaked out. So I don't know how much they know. And I also, I'm totally fascinated, like one of the things with the whole Breaking 2 project, I was like, how do you decide to spend what I estimate might have been tens of millions of dollars on this huge publicity stunt unless you know you have a shoe that is absolute dynamite? So I was trying to establish the timeline. So you discovered this shoe and then you decided to do this Breaking 2 thing. And they insist that it was the other way around, that they decided to design a crazy shoe and have this crazy race. And then they worked on the shoe and tried a billion different iterations and stumbled on the one they ended up with. And I'm like, seriously, seriously, you decided to do Breaking 2 before you knew you just happened to stumble on what seems to be like the most significant advance in shoe technology since like the invention of leather. And so you can't plan for that. You can't plan for a breakthrough like that. So, maybe they were just, they started the Breaking 2 project and they were just thinking it was going to be like, hey, everyone come to Eugene and we're going to host the Eugene Marathon and some guy is going to try and run stuff too. And they just made it into a bigger thing once they stumbled on the shoe. But all of that is very murky to me exactly when they figured out they had a real, something really special in the shoe.

Especially when you, I mean, I worked at Nike for a summer internship and talking to some of the run guys there. And they talked to you about development timelines for shoes. They're so long. I mean, they're really, really long, not only for the technology, but even once they figure out what technology they want to use to get it actually ready for production. Just takes a long time. So yeah, you would think they would have known something before they, before they decided that Kipchoge was going to do the thing. Or maybe they thought that their secret weapon was just the drafting or the secret nutrition.

Yeah, you know, that's a very good point because the, I mean, I think when you talk to Andy Jones, who's the British physiologist, who was a key part of it, he was giving talks a couple, you know, back in 2015, I heard him give a talk saying basically that he thought if you wanted to run a sub two hour marathon and you just have a guy run behind a truck right now and getting the aerodynamics right would be enough to do it. And so they may have thought that the other ingredients would be significant. But even then, it's like, Nike's not going to sell, you know, drafting the truck. So it's like, you know, it becomes a much, it certainly is a much more logical brand play once they have this pair of shoes to pedal, which, you know, and we all, I think everyone would agree, whatever you think of Breaking Two, it's worked out well for them from both from an overall brand strength perspective and from a selling these particular shoes perspective.

Well, it's made them relevant in the running shoe category again, because for a long time, they just frankly weren't because they didn't have very good shoes. And now people are, people can't get enough. So it's interesting, but it does, it does make everyone, I think it does force everyone who wants to compete at a high level, even if that's within their own relative set of performances, if they want to compete at a high level, they've got to at least consider the shoes if they can afford it, because it seems to give a definitive advantage.

Yeah, and that's, and that of course opens up a whole set of questions about whether that's how you want things to, how things should be at the upper levels of sport. But it's tricky, it forces you, I mean, for those of us who are not competing for Olympic medals or whatever, it forces, and it's been certainly for me, it forces some reflection on, like, well, what is fair, what is acceptable, what am I looking for when I try to get a minute faster or 30 seconds faster, whatever the case may be, what's a satisfying way of getting faster and what isn't? And I'm not posing that as a sort of purely empty question where I think I know the answer because I don't, I think it's a difficult question.

Yeah, it's a good point. It's like, if I could run two minutes faster in the shoes, does that satisfy you? Is that satisfying versus knowing that I had to work harder or train smarter or rest better? I don't know. I mean, for me to this point, I don't want to spend over $200 on a pair of shoes. So you know, I don't care if it's going to make me turn two minutes faster, I'd rather just work harder. That's my perspective.

Yeah. Well, I mean, it's like, if some marathon promises to install industrial fans along the last 10 miles so that you get blown to be a minute faster, I mean, where is that on the spectrum? Like, there's lots of ways of getting faster. And I don't think it's as clear. I think people on both sides, both people who think it's clear that the Vapor Flies are cheating and people on the other side who are like, there's absolutely zero issue here. There's nothing to even talk about. I'm not in tune with either of those views. I think there's certainly a reason to reflect on what sorts of performance enhancements are consistent with what we're all trying to get out of from sport.

I was recently talking with the Marathon Investigation Guide, Derek Murphy, and asking about, we were talking about a specific case related to a rogue athlete. But one of the things that came up in the discussion was the idea of downhill marathons and whether or not they should be eligible for Boston qualification if you're dropping 5, 000 feet in elevation in a marathon. And I tend to have a personal belief that that's not something I would go do because there's a clear advantage of being able to run downhill like that. And obviously you have to train specifically for it. Not everybody can do it well because of that eccentric loading. But for me, I would have an asterisk on that kind of result. And so is that different than the four percents or, you know, so those types of questions come up. And then the argument kind of went to, well, what about weather? What about choosing a marathon that's good known for its good weather? Is that somehow choosing an advantage that's unfair? And I guess there is a slippery slope there at some point. But, you know, for me, a downhill marathon still feels a little bit like you kind of cheated it.

And this is a conversation we could spend six hours on. But you know, so, well, I was going to say there are rules. The IAAF has rules on what's permitted for record purposes. Of course, the Association of Road Racing Statisticians has different rules on what should be permitted and whether it's the start and finish have to be within 30% of the total distance of the race or 50% of the total distance of the race and you can have no more than a certain, I can't remember whether it is a foot per mile or a meter per kilometer or something like that in descent. So then to me, it's like, okay, let's agree on the rules. And then within those rules, if you want to optimize the course, you know, more power to you. But it's not just sort of like, well, if you're willing to run down Mount Everest, then you can run down Mount Everest. So and similarly with the shoes, it's like, I don't think there's a sort of like, you know, on the seventh day, God decided that shoes should only have, you know, be have a stack height of 30 millimeters and should have no, you know, elements that are not, you know, in the wrong part of the periodic table. I think we decide what shoes are, but we have to decide, you know, we should be clear on the rules and we should make the rules proactively, so that we're deciding that these shoes are allowed, not just sort of slipping in without any thought. Because I think if you, I kind of think that if 10 years ago, we'd sat down to decide, hey, let's be farsighted and really specify what sorts of footwear should be allowed in road races, so that we don't have to get into any sort of technological arms races, the rules we might have come up with probably would have specified no, you know, metallic or spring-like components in the midsole or something like that. But instead, we're being forced to try and think about this after the shoe is already out there and has already set a world record, which makes it a lot more complicated. So, yeah, but in terms of the whole down tail thing, yeah, I think it's sort of like the performance enhancing drugs, too. It's not like there's a natural, this is right and this is wrong, the bright line that everyone will agree on. It's always gray area, so we just have to come to an agreement over what's acceptable, whether that's how much of a downhill slope still counts as a record quality marathon or a qualifying marathon and how much doesn't or whether it's what can go into issue.

So a related point to footwear is running form and you've had a decent number of articles recently touching on various aspects of running form that I wanted to drill in on because I think that will be helpful for our listeners. The first I think is kind of funny where you talked about the hobby jogger machine essentially that some researchers in Canada had figured out a way to basically identify the difference or have a machine identify the difference in a more elite athlete or competitive runner versus a more recreational runner simply by looking at variables in running form. First question though, before we get into the details of the study, did you get flack for using that term, hobby jogger machine, index machine or whatever you had there?

I was surprised that I didn't get any directly back. I thought I would. I mean, I hoped that I phrased it in such a way that it was clear that I was kind of joking about it, especially I started off the article by pointing out that this was one of those things that gets talked about on the let's run message boards so that it's like, it's always looking for a way of making fun of hobby joggers. So yeah, short answer is no, no one called me out on it. But maybe there are, there's a bunch of people who are boiling mad and angry and just didn't bother to waste the time chewing it out.

Well, I want to use this as an opportunity for them to yell loudly if they're so inclined.

I want to use this as an opportunity to say that it was tongue in cheek. I would classify myself as a hobby jogger if I use that term, which I don't, I only use it in tongue in cheek.

So we learn you can't just look at it, but you can't just look at someone and know the difference and also that these sort of common characteristics you think about, cadence, stride length, aren't the differentiators. The machine found some other things. It seems like the overall theme from the article was that stride consistency mattered most. So what did we learn there about that part of it?

Yeah, so it's possible to sort of construct reasons that, oh, consistency is important because X, Y, and Z. I think what it reflects is that if you've been doing something for a long time, you're really dialed in to what's the right stride length for you, what's the right joint angles and all that. So you're running with it instead of being sort of all over the map like someone who's just started running might be. But the problem is you can't just instruct someone to say, hey, you should try and run more consistently. That's not really a useful piece of advice. And this is where we get to, I think, with a lot of the running form discussions that even if you can detect what quote unquote good running form is, it's often not something that's easy to just sort of adopt. So this particular, this sort of what I called the hobby jogger detection machine, this sort of way of looking at running stride, having the computer analyze it and say, you know, oh, this person is running like an experienced person and this person isn't. That could be useful diagnostically. That could be, you know, useful to if someone's having a lot of injury problems, it's not your, if you are able to then analyze their stride and it says, well, you've got a lot of variability in your stride, then that's going to, that's telling you something. And it may, it may tell you about some, you know, muscle deficits or, you know, whatever, it's flexibility deficits or, you know, something about the way you run is not optimized. So, or if you're coming back from an injury, for instance, you may start with more variability and as you, as you get more healthy, you know, get back to a less variable and more consistent stride. But I think, I thought this was an interesting study, but I think actually the most important takeaway is that it doesn't give you three key things you can do to make your stride better or anything like that. It just, it's a reflection, it's a way of diagnosing, are you running, perhaps are you running well? Are you, are you, is your stride getting better compared to what it was the year ago?

One beef I have with your article here, Alex, which I wanted to tease out in discussion is that you conflate the terms competitive and recreational with experienced and inexperienced at various times. And it seemed like the study was trying to differentiate the stride differences or the biomechanical differences between quote unquote fast runners and quote unquote slower runners. But then you also woven the study of experience versus inexperience and I think the two could be correlated but not necessarily related.

Yeah. No, that's a great point.

So did I miss something there or was there also an experience and inexperience clear takeaway to you?

No, you're right that it... So the way they distinguished between the two groups was based on their World Masters Association age grading performances. So they were looking at competitive versus quote unquote recreational just based on how fast they were. But based on the training characteristics reported, they used it as a proxy also, an imperfect proxy for amount of running, for experience, years of experience and typical mileage. And we definitely know that those two things don't always go hand in hand. I was a little cavalier in using them interchangeably. I think for the most part, when we talk about things like stride consistency, that's going to be a reflection more of experience, which is I guess why I pivoted to that in the article than it is of who has a naturally higher VO2 max or whatever. I think some of the speed things that vary independent. So if you take two people, one of whom just happens to have a higher VO2 max than the other or is more trainable and have them do identical training programs for five years or whatever, I think they're more likely to have quite similar biomechanical characteristics, at least according to this sort of this form of stride analysis, because I think these things that this study was looking for, these sorts of subtle differences are more likely to be a function of experience than of natural talent, if you want to call it that.

Yeah. One of the things that I talk to people about as a coach without any study backing me up, but just something I think I've seen over the years is that one way to improve your form, quite frankly and sometimes depressingly for some people is just to simply run more, because running more I think does help your body over time through that experience and consistency find its more efficient mode of moving.

I think that's 100% correct. And in fact, I would say that's perhaps the only evidence-based way of significantly improving your running efficiency is running more. If you do studies where it's like, okay, we're going to teach this person to hold their arms in the right place, we're going to teach them how to land on their feet, yada, yada, yada. Almost all those studies either make no difference to efficiency or make efficiency worse. The one intervention that reliably leads to improvements in running efficiency is just running more time. So you can do cross-sectional studies where you look at a bunch of people who have been running for 15 years, 10 years, 5 years or whatever, and the longer the people have been running, the more efficient they tend to be. And you can also do longitudinal studies where you take a bunch of people, measure their efficiency, have them run for months or whatever, and they bring them back, measure their efficiency again, and they'll be better. And the biggest changes come at the beginning. When you start running, you're extremely inefficient, and over weeks or months, you pretty quickly start to dial in and get better and better. But those improvements continue over the course of years. So I think there's lots of science behind what you're saying, and it's probably the single best piece of advice you can give to people is that get out there and put in some mileage and your body will find its best form.

There's no magic formula. You had a related article that said you can't think your way to better running form, and that in fact, people are trying to think about better form actually end up being less efficient because theoretically, they're trying to maybe get to a form that isn't actually better for them even though in their head, they think they're conjuring some better form. So I think that's also interesting too.

Let me make a subtle sort of alteration to that. Even if the new form they're trying to adopt is objectively better, thinking about it and trying to do it consciously may still result in worse efficiency. The analogy here is think about tying your shoes, which I'm confident that you're fairly good at that. But if you try and talk someone through, maybe you've taught your kids to tie shoes recently, but for someone who hasn't thought about it in a long time, if you think about how do you tie your shoes, what happens where, when does the rabbit go around the tree, where's the hole, if you start doing it step by step, it actually becomes quite a complicated process. You will get less good if you try and think really explicitly about each step of what you're doing when you tie your shoes. There are a lot of motor sequences of motor actions that happen much more smoothly if you just leave it to your subconscious. You've learned it, you've consciously learned it, and you've learned it so well that it's now something you don't have to think about and you're better off not thinking about. There's a lot of research into this motor learning and evidence that when you're forced to think carefully about the sequence of events, you get worse. This underlies a lot of the literature on choking. If you're a golfer trying to sink that winning putt, one of the things that happens when the pressure is really on, when this is the putt to win a million bucks, is you no longer just step up and just hit the putt like you have a million times. Sometimes you start thinking about it and you start trying to consciously control. Okay, remember, don't pull it, don't swing too hard. By consciously controlling it, you make it worse. You're taking it out of the well-practiced subconscious. The same is true to some extent with running. You start trying to think about, explicitly about where your legs should go and what your arms should do, and you get less smooth. It's not 100% clear exactly how or why this happens. One of the theories is that when you're trying to do it consciously, you're not as accurate in sending signals to the muscles that need to do things, so you end up sending some signals to the opposing muscles, so you're co-contracting muscles that are trying to move up and down or whatever at the same time and spending extra energy that you shouldn't be spending. For whatever reason, it's a pretty robust finding that if you tell people, okay, focus on the motion of your legs, instantly their oxygen consumption will be consuming a little bit more energy at the same pace compared to if you just tell them to look at the scenery.

So pulling in another form article that you recently published on what we can learn from elite running form, there was a massive biomechanical analysis done at, I believe it was the World Championships on elite athletes and what we can learn from their running form. In that article, you talked about to me some comforting ideas like 47% of elite runners in certain races are heel strikers, which makes a heel striker like me feel good. In that one, you also talked about how those that excelled or that the elite level tended to show more form consistency as fatigue built as well, which also underscores this idea that really striked consistency, not only for an individual comparing to other individuals, but also for a single person throughout a single endeavor, their ability to maintain that consistency longer and longer at certain paces is only going to benefit them as well. It's another lesson to pull in from the elite world.

And I think one of the interesting things in there is the idea that... So this was a study that was done at the World Championships with a billion high-tech high-speed cameras set up in all sorts of different places, and they were doing all sorts of sophisticated analysis. But we're in an age now where we're starting to be able to collect a lot more data, a lot more personal tech, accelerometers, whatever you want, measuring things about your stride. And we're not really sure what to do with a lot of the data. There's a lot of companies selling various running devices. And we're still trying to figure out, is it useful to know your left-right balance after that it was 49.5% rather than 50%? I don't know. But this is a case where this analysis they did of stride consistency over the course of a race. So what changes when you're 9K into a 10K race compared to when you're 1K? And some of the best runners were very consistent, but not all of them. Some of them were changing. And I think it was Steve Magnus, the coach at the University of Houston, who wrote some of the analysis of this study. And one of the points he made is that you can look at the things that do change, and they can tell you something about where your weakest link is. So if you can go back over your data and say, man, when I'm tired, my cadence really starts to drop. Or when I'm tired, my ground contact time, or whatever, my up and down motion, whatever the case may be, you can see what it is that changes, and then you can think about, well, what could I do to strengthen that, or to address that asymmetry that's starting to show up, or whatever the case may be. So I think rather than saying, rather than looking at data from wearables and saying, well, the ideal is 180 steps a minute, or whatever, therefore, I should try to be like that. I think that's nonsense. But looking at, here's how I run when I'm feeling good, and wow, here's what changed when I was getting tired. That tells you something about maybe what you need to address in training.

Yeah, along with running more. That particular study also made me feel better, because you mentioned in there that the evidence is that some of the best runners at their events, including Al Mazayana, 10K champion, she has some dramatic asymmetries in her stride, which as somebody who feels like, I don't have a perfect stride and certainly not a symmetrical stride, it makes me feel better that it's okay to have some unique characteristics in your stride. Even the best runners in the world might exhibit those and can still run fast.

Yeah, I think for her, it was something like a 20-centimeter difference between the length of her right and left strides by the end of the race, 20 centimeters, I guess, is something like eight inches. Yeah, yeah.

That's a big difference.

Yeah, you sort of imagine her hopping along like she's on a poker stick or something, but she looks pretty good when she's half a lap in front of the rest of the field. So I don't think this is an argument that you should cultivate astride symmetry, but that it makes me think of the analogy to one of the big debates in modern medicine, which is that if you have a billion high-tech screening tools and you have everyone go to the doctor every year and do the mammogram and the prostate test and the colonoscopy, and you're going to find a lot of things wrong with almost everybody, and the question is, which of those things have any significance and which of those things, if you start trying to treat every sort of apparent abnormality, you very quickly start being counterproductive. And similarly, you talk about running form. It's like, oh, this person has a slightly asymmetric stride or their arm isn't where we think it should be. It's possible that that's holding them back. It's also possible that it's not at all holding them back, and by messing with it, you're just wasting their time and possibly messing with their stride. And around that same time, there was this new study that came out about Usain Bolt showing that he had a really asymmetric stride, and the quote from the researcher, from Peter Wayan, the SMU researcher, was correcting his asymmetry would not necessarily speed them up and might even slow them down. And so I think that's an important thing to remember for all of us that as we get more data, it's a lot easier to find the ways in which we are not, quote unquote, perfect. And you don't necessarily want to chase every one of those rabbits down the hole. Sometimes those things are just fine to be left alone.

You're beautiful just the way you are.

That's exactly what my message is.

So speaking of sort of keeping it simple, one of your recent articles is sort of on the simplicity of what data matters and data tracking matters. And this was related to a study in cyclists about basically how they were feeling after a run and what really mattered. And the study looked at a lot of really scientific data on heart rate and watts and all those things that you could measure as a cyclist, which are even more robust than that for runners. But also just the simple sort of effort indications of how you felt on a given day. The ultimate outcome seemed to be that simple from a data tracking standpoint in our world of technology and as we like to call them, geekometers on our wrists that sometimes just actually tracking how you feel might actually be as powerful.

And I'll admit there's a certain attraction for me as a journalist and as a Luddite to be able to say, oh yeah, just tune into your feelings and that's all you need. Because it turns out to be just as good as all the technology. I think ultimately, I think where I end up in that article and where I think the advice that I'll give here is that really the most powerful combination is paying attention to how you feel. So recording things like you're at the end of each run, just writing down on a scale of one to 10, how hard was that effort? So having that data, but also having some objective data, whether it's pace or heart rate or power, if you're a cyclist or whatever the case may be. And then comparing, seeing how the two should move roughly in sync, like the faster you're running, the harder it should feel and the longer they're running, the harder it should feel. And when you see deviations from that, when your effort is going, you're reporting that this week's run was harder than last week's run, but you ran slower, then that should give you pause and you should check, well, was it a lot hotter this week or something? Was there some external factor? Am I more tired because I had a big workout yesterday? Or is this a sign that something's going off the rails? Am I getting sick? Do I have other life stress that's interfering? So that to me is the best early warning system for whether you're handling your training load appropriately, more so than any one technological measure like your heart rate variability or whatever Garmin or Polar wants to tell you about your recovery status. You need to be incorporating how you feel. There's a ton of information that's baked into that simple measure of how you feel that is probably more sensitive. And that's what this study, which comes from a big database of professional cycling kept by Team Sunweb, the cycling team, it's probably more sensitive or at least as sensitive as any other collection of data that you can collect.

Yeah, I think it's important to journal it and I also think it's important to, as you say, correlate with what data you do have, particularly after workouts. Because, to me, learning to operate by effort, not only in workouts, but afterwards with how you might be balancing your recovery or how you might be then turning around to do another workout again, depending on how you feel, all of that learning is hard. And as a human, I think we're becoming less and less in touch, as humans, we're becoming less and less in touch with how we feel or how certain things make us feel, whether it be workouts or maybe just what we're eating. And as a result, even though we were more informed in some ways, we're less informed because we're not listening to just the single best measuring device that we have, which is our own bodies.

Yeah. And I think, so I think in a general holistic sense, being aware of how we feel is really important and just also in a very narrow sense, when you're racing, ultimately only you can decide whether you're going at a speed that you can sustain to the finish or whether you're going at a slower speed than you can sustain to the finish. You have to be, you have to understand what the feeling is of being at a pace halfway through an effort and what sustainable feels like. And that takes practice. What it takes is a lot of runs where you're pushing yourself and some runs where you push yourself too hard and you blow up before the end of the workout. Others where you finish strong and realize I should have been willing to push a little harder earlier. And you have to be listening to what it feels like and be tuned into that. So I think part of it is even beyond just beyond the sort of training journal and analysis perspective, you just have to have the mindset that it's important to be tuned into how you're feeling.

So keeping along the theme of keep it simple, we got in a grand debate on our last episode together with Christy Eshwan when Eshwan didn't talk about her book, Good to Go, episode 110 on hydration and the perspective that she shares in her book that has been shared by others like Tim Noakes that if you drink to thirst and endurance and event, you're going to be just okay. You were playing a little bit of devil's advocate there. You also subsequently came out with another article on hydration and that basically said drinking to thirst is okay. I wanted to add a personal anecdote to the discussion that we can then talk about. This past weekend, I ran a marathon 26.2 miles with a friend of mine. I was pacing him to what was ultimately a PR for him. Because it wasn't an all out effort for me, I thought, you know what, this will be an opportunity to test out this theory of drinking to thirst and not be so rigorous about my hydration. Because normally in a marathon, I'll take water starting at the second water, or Gatorade or water, noon or whatever they may have, starting at the second water stop and try to hit every water stop until the end, basically to stay ahead of my hydration. That's my typical approach if I'm racing. In this case, I've got a little bit more flexibility. I'm not going all out for me, so I can play with it a little bit and drink to thirst. That's what I did. Every time I passed a water station and I felt like I needed to get a drink, I would grab something. Sometimes I wouldn't. Sometimes I would grab water and throw it on top of my head because it got a little bit warm and sunny later in the day. But as I progressed through the marathon, I found that I was getting thirsty more frequently in that I went from sporadically hitting water stops early to grabbing something at every stop later, probably starting about the mile, 18 or 19 mile point. By the time I got to 24, I was so thirsty that I couldn't satiate my thirst in the time that I was flying past the water stations, and certainly not with the amount of liquid that was retained in the cup after half of it splashed out upon me grabbing it. And it was fine at that point. I only had two miles to the finish. I don't think it inhibited my performance. But when I got to the finish, I promptly pounded a full bottle of water because I felt like I needed it. So I guess for me, it raised some of the practical things that you mentioned in your most recent article about hydration, which is that, yes, drinking to thirst works in theory, but you also have to factor in the practical elements of, well, if I'm flying by a water stop, I can't always drink fully to thirst in what I can grab in those split seconds. So let's talk about that.

Yeah, and I think your story illustrates a lot of the sort of dilemmas and debates that come up here. I mean, so one argument would be to say, yeah, you were pretty thirsty by mile 25 and you drank a lot of water when you finished. That's how it's supposed to work, right? Like that's, everything went according to plan. And you said yourself, you don't think it necessarily inhibited you. And if it did, it was sort of microscopic level and maybe to the extent that it inhibited you, it's more than made up for by the fact that you were a little more relaxed at some other water stops. You didn't stop and drink, which would have slowed you down. You were able to dump some water on your head, which cooled you down. And so not stressing about having to chug every time you went through a water stop might've had some sort of positive effect that might've bounced out any hypothetical negative effect. But conversely, I think, you know, your experience is exactly why I don't think many elite marathoners, whether or not they believe the theory of drinking to thirst, I don't think many of them head out there just thinking, well, we'll see what happens. You know, maybe we'll stop in and get a drink if I get thirsty or whatever. They have a pretty preset plan. Now part of that is that for marathoners, you know, maybe the more important thing about drinking is getting enough carbohydrates in. And so people, they don't even care whether they're thirsty, they're drinking when they're not thirsty because they want to make sure they're getting enough carbohydrates in. But the other thing is, like you said, yeah, there may be water stops every, or drink stops every 5K. If your plan is I'm going to drink whenever I get thirsty, you know, there's no law of nature that says you only get thirsty every five kilometers. And so if you get thirsty at 12.5 kilometers, you can't drink, you don't have anything to drink. And so right there, you've already sort of failed to adhere to what you said you were going to do, which is to drink when you were thirsty. And that's going to, you know, keep reoccurring. And then like you said, you're going to, you're going to zoom on by trying to maintain your race pace. You're going to throw, you know, grab a cup, spill three quarters of it and choke on the other quarter of it. I mean, that's, that's not necessarily going to quench your thirst and you're, and you're also going to be, your, your internal processing is going to be focused on your pace, your legs, all sorts of other things. So you may not be tuned into your thirst as much as you would be if you were in a laboratory on a treadmill with a drink in front of you and a scientist measuring how much you drank. So I think there is a difference between the, the, the, the theory, which I agree with, and the, the practical implementation in the real world that, that, and, and so some people might say, well, you're still drinking to thirst, you just have to plan for it. Well, it becomes a sort of angels dancing on a head of a pin, whether you're in a marathon, whether it's even possible to just quote unquote drink to thirst.

And in the study you referenced in your article that came out, I believe after we had our discussion, there is some science now that says basically drinking to thirst is as good as drinking to plan. But again, that's in the practical confines of a scientific study.

So there was a meta analysis that was done of, of a bunch of different studies trying to compare drinking to thirst to drinking according to plan. And it's certainly true that if you drink according to some, to this plan, to these sorts of plans, you can make sure you lose less fluid. If you just drink according to thirst, you will get more dehydrated. But in these studies, it didn't make a big, it didn't make any significant difference to race performance. And my, you know, as we've said, these lab studies have some limitations in applying them to the real world, because it's not the same when you're out on a marathon trying to drink. But I also think, you know, I suspect what these studies are actually finding is that being dehydrated probably does have some mild negative effects, being mildly dehydrated. But rehydrating also has some negative effects. Like I was saying earlier, that when you're running hard, if you're racing, drinking is a problem. It's uncomfortable. It makes your stomach, you know, it interferes with your breathing and it may upset your stomach. So those two things may counterbalance. So drinking to thirst may come out in the wash for in a lot of situations, maybe a sort of equally good strategy, not because dehydration has no effect, but because the pros and cons balance on average. Now the catch is that that may not apply for everybody. Some people may be more sensitive, you know, have more sensitive to thirst than others. And there's certainly evidence that you get less sensitive to thirst as you get older. And some people may have unusually high sweat rates or, you know, other factors that make them a little bit more, a little bit less sensitive to the risk of dehydration. So that's another reason that I'd be a little hesitant to say nobody needs to worry about drinking other than just paying attention to when they're thirsty.

I think I land where you landed in that most recent article, which is to say if you're in training or going about your day to day life, drinking to thirst is perfectly acceptable approach because you're not going to have issues. But in a race, I probably land on the side of planning for it because it makes me personally feel at ease to know that I have a plan, to know that I'm not going to end up thirsty at mile 25 thinking about that versus trying to press my hardest at the end if the time matters. So plus the practical elements that you mentioned of having to plan so that you don't end up in a situation where you're without when you need it.

The one thing I'll add to that is I'm with you too. If I'm talking to a competitive marathoner, absolutely I'm going to suggest that they plan their hydration for during the race and that they rehearse it in training so that they're comfortable with that hydration protocol. But maybe one thing we can take from this is that if you miss a stop, if something goes wrong and you drop your cup, and this happens to the elites all the time, they miss their bottles or whatever, the thought that goes through your head shouldn't be, oh man, now I'm going to be behind on my hydration and now my head's going to explode and I'm going to catch fire and die. It should be, no big deal, I'll get some fluids at the next stop. It makes sense to pre-plan your hydration plan and to hydrate reasonably aggressively during the race, but it's probably not a big deal and if you miss a couple stops, it's unlikely to have a serious effect.

It's going to be okay. So I want to finish this discussion talking not about running, but fascinating article you wrote about Colin O'Brady who recently became, was it the first solo unsupported person across the South Pole?

Well, that's a question for debate.

Although I know it's up for debate because I just was recently Googling it myself. I'm like, oh my gosh, this guy doesn't even get credit. We'll get to that controversy in a second. But you actually interviewed Colin before he was going to leave and talked to him about his nutrition planning, basically trying to figure out how to carry on a sled 8, 000 calories a day, which is the math that they figured out that he needed in order to sustain what ended up being 54 days of an effort. I think he planned for 70 days of nutrition out there.

I think he initially planned 70, but just before right before he left, his sled was too heavy and he chucked off five or six days. So I think he only had okay. So cut it back for maybe.

So first of all, and he was competing with another explorer at the time, he ended up finishing just a few days behind him, I believe. But he crossed 300 miles in the south, across the South Pole, across Antarctica, took 54 days carrying, I think it was 300 pounds worth of food to start. And obviously that shrunk as he went covering anywhere from 14 to 20 miles per day, at least on average, depending on the section that he was in. Apparently, he made one final massive push to get to the finish line in the last couple of days. Was this just not a fascinating discussion to have with this guy about what he was about to do? It's kind of crazy.

It was cool. So the back story is I was doing this sort of weird hiking event in Vermont where you hike up, I'm already blanking on the name of the mountain, but you hike up a modest Vermont mountain 17 times to cover the total height of Everest. Colin and I-

You did the event?

Yeah. Colin and I were both there giving a little talk beforehand and we both did the event hiking up. I think it took me about 12 hours, but you had, was that right? 12?

No, it took me about 18 hours, something like that.

What was the total elevation gain? 29, 000 feet, 29, 029, and then you take the gondola down so you don't have to do the down.

Oh, so you're just doing the ups.

Yeah. Wow.

How many miles?

I think it was, I don't know, a mile and a half per loop, so something like 25, 26 miles, something like that. I can't remember exactly, but somewhere in the vicinity. He allowed 36 hours for you to complete it and they had tents set up at the bottom of the ski hill, Mount Stratton. That was the place where it was held. Anyway, long background story to say that he gave his talk about stuff he'd done and I found it more interesting than I expected. I don't have huge patience for motivational talks, but he was an interesting guy and I enjoyed his talk. So during this hiking event where we were all hiking up and down this mountain, I ended up hiking with him for a little while and chatting more. This question of the fuel, he was just on the verge of announcing this Antarctic mission. So I was asking him about it and this fueling question came up and it became clear this was a really interesting physics or thermodynamics question because it's like, well, if you need to bring enough food, why don't you just bring more food? Well, then the sled gets heavier. Well, then why don't you bring less food? Well, then we don't have enough food to make it across. It seems simple when you put it that way, but it becomes a really complicated optimization problem where you have to decide, are you going to try and keep it light and go faster and then you'll finish it quicker or you can bring more food, but it's going to slow you down. It's going to take you longer. So you'll need more food. There's five different moving variables or whatever in this equation where you're trying to figure out how much food to bring and most people who've done these Antarctic expeditions in the past have opted for somewhere in the vicinity of 5, 000 calories, which in some cases has meant that they've starved to death and died like the Scott expedition or the people who've successfully done expeditions like this have lost 30, 40, 50 pounds over the course of a couple months. And so he was taking a different approach. He wanted to bring 8, 000 calories a day, almost exclusively in the form of this custom made agglomeration of food that a company was making for him called the Colin Bar, which was basically one single bar was like a little over a thousand calories and he was going to eat, I don't know, four or five of these a day for two months.

It's like bricks of just food mashed together basically.

It sounded like an interesting guy. He figured that by forcing himself to chow down these bricks, that would give him the fuel he needed to be able to get through this mission and have enough energy and not be sort of, well, like the last guy or one of the last guys who tried it in 2016 was Henry Worsley who died after something like 70 days out there.

It's fascinating to me. I mean, one of the things you talk about in the bars, in the process of creating the bars, they were looking at food sensitivity and trying to figure out which foods he was sensitive to or that might cause inflammation in his body. They found a list of things they didn't want to put in there and a list of things that would, you know, one of the common things, I guess, that people use to try to get add calories in these types of expeditions is just add butter to everything. But butter showed some sensitivity issues with him. And so we ended up going more coconut oil to get those kind of dense fats. And with this whole idea that managing inflammation when you're already pushing your body the way you are, pulling a sled, skiing across ice in extreme conditions, it's interesting that they thought that the inflammation caused by the food would matter. And so they specifically concocted this bar to contain things that they knew didn't mess with them.

Yeah.

I thought that was cool.

I thought it was cool too. And I don't know, to be 100% honest, I don't know whether there's any, any truth or relevance to that. You can make a good mechanistic argument for why that should be the case that inflammation is inflammation. And you look at Henry Worsley who died while he had systemic inflammation and ended up with an ulcer probably that allowed his bacterial or his intestinal lining got inflamed. So, who knows if that was all connected or not. When I was writing this article, I was like, well, how do I report this? Because this is just this company that designed this food saying that, yeah, we think inflammation is going to be the real key. Well, no one's done studies on sending people across the Arctic with and without pro-inflammatory or anti-inflammatory foods. We don't really know whether it works. It's a theory. And so I find it intriguing, I'd like to see it tested in the lab to see whether people do better in prolonged endurance exertions when they're eating foods that don't trigger inflammation in them. There's a lot, inflammation is a hot topic these days in research, in exercise research, in health research, and looking at the connections between different kinds of inflammation and whether that can have an influence on performance. And so I thought that was a cool thing they were doing. I just have no idea whether it had any relevance or any bearing whatsoever on the final outcome. Is it real or not? It's hard to know.

Have you talked to him since?

I haven't. He's a famous guy now. He's too cool for school. It's not like he's not returning my calls or anything, but I guess for me as a journalist, I'm less interested in talking to the people who are already being interviewed by 52 other people because I have very little confidence that I'll think of the one question that no one has asked them, so I'm more interested in talking to them before they're famous.

I'm fascinated, though, on that about how much attention he gets versus the Rudd who finished second, at least in this situation. I would imagine that the differences are stark in terms of the coverage they're getting, but there is this controversy that I was reading about today that certain parts of the Explorer community are saying this was not unaided because he was doing a big chunk of it on this ice highway that was basically manicured ice for him to be able to move more quickly on skis. Also, they're saying he didn't actually cross all of Antarctica from coast to coast because I guess he had excluded certain ice shelves or I'm not exactly sure the geography of that argument, but that's fascinating. Have you done any reading on this? What do you think? Is this legit or not?

Yeah, it's interesting. I was totally unaware of these sorts of subtleties when I wrote that article and I sort of didn't think about it at all until there was a New York Times article, I can't remember, maybe just after he finished or just before he finished, pointing out that there was a guy, I'm going to butcher his name, Borg Usland or something along those lines, a Scandinavian guy back in the 90s who crossed the continent solo and unaided, but there's a difference between unassisted and unaided or something. He didn't have any external help, but he had a little homemade little sail that he attached to his sled when he had a tailwind to help push the sail. They were considering, well, he had help because he used a little sail on his sled. I was thinking, and I'd heard about this guy, Usland, but I assumed he was basically sailing a boat across the ice, as opposed to manhauling a sled, but also pulling out a little handmade sail occasionally. Then there was the question of, well, what are they really doing that Usland didn't do? Usland went farther, did a longer route. Then, as you said, there's these other issues that have come up since that I was totally unaware of. First of all, the route that O'Brady and Rudd did was basically across the landmass, but they didn't cross the ice shelves. What critics are saying is, well, these ice shelves, they're not sea ice. It's land ice that's just come on. It's part of the continent. It never goes away. It's formed from the glaciers, not from the sea. It's not saltwater ice. It's considered part of the continent by almost everyone who's tried to do this before. Then there's this road to the South Pole, which is really just a sort of smoothed bit of ice that makes it easier to get supplies to the North Pole. Ultimately, where do I come down on it? I wish I'd known some of those details when I wrote my article because I would have liked to put in some of that context, give some credit to Usland as the guy who made it across solo and point out the differences between some of the routes, which are significantly longer and harder compared to this route, but ultimately, in this world of modern day quote unquote exploring, everything is a first, right? Everyone finds an angle. It's like I'm the first left handed redhead to climb this mountain on a Tuesday. And it is what it is. And I think what they did is something that hasn't been done before. And it's cool. It's not as cool as it would have been if no one had ever done anything like it or if it was the hardest possible way of crossing the Antarctica. And I think it's worth understanding and knowing that. But it's also not like they cheated and lied or anything. They picked a route that has some justification and they did that route. And it was hard, maybe not quite as hard as I probably thought when I first wrote the article, but still pretty amazingly hard.

Yeah, 300 miles over ice, 54 days. I think it's a lot more than 300.

I think it's more like 900 miles or something like that.

Oh, was it? Oh yeah, you're right. You're right. Well, yeah, he covered 900 miles, but I guess it's 300 miles as the crow flies.

Oh, right, because they went through the South Pole. So it's a bit of a...

Yeah, something about the angles and sort of the back and forth. So anyway, it's insane.

Yeah, yeah, yeah.

It's still insane.

So I think, full credit, and just I think it's worth in these discussions to acknowledge that others have done some pretty cool things down in the Antarctica, too, like Borgoose looked at in the 90s.

It also just underscores for me that, and Colin O'Brady, I mean, he's a triathlete. He's got some serious explorer like resume, things on his resume. But in a lot of ways, he's just kind of a normal dude who likes to push himself in extreme ways. And so, I don't know, for me, when I see these things, it motivates me to find what does extreme mean for me and go find it because it's going to be a small, tiny, tiny sliver or fraction of what somebody like Colin O'Brady would do. But if he can do that, then I can do something much tinier if that helps.

And I would emphasize that his explorer resume is, you know, a few years ago, he had zero explorer resume, and he just basically decided he wanted to do the Explorer's Grand Slam, which is the seven summits plus the two poles, and he did it. And again, in terms of, you know, these sort of, quote unquote, records, he did it, and he was the fastest person to do it from first to last of these nine missions. But before that, he'd done very little. So his only Antarctic experience was as a client on guided tours, from what I understand, so, you know, he was willing to jump, he's willing to jump in with both feet and do things physically that I couldn't do and take risks that I wouldn't want to take. But like you, I look at it and I say, that's pretty cool, and I'd like to, you know, unshackle some of my own self-imposed limits and go and do some cool stuff.

Oh, yeah. With that idea, we'll wrap this discussion. Thanks, Alex, again, for joining me your fifth time. It's always a pleasure to talk about you. And this was fun to kind of go through, as I'm calling you, the smorgasbord of Sweat Science articles. So I think we covered a lot of ground. Thanks again.

Yeah, it's fun to, gosh, it's fun to remember some of the things I wrote about. And yeah, thank you for the conversation and for the opportunity.

So there you go. Alex Hutchinson, again, of course, go back and listen to some of the other episodes we've had with him. Again, he's been on episode 48, 64, 81 and 110. If you haven't already listened to 110, I definitely recommend that's a good one on the science of recovery with Christie Eshwandan. Thanks again to Alex for being a good friend of the show. Always interesting, always good insights coming from him. So there you go. That's it. Episode 117 of the Running Rogue podcast. As always, you can check us out at rogrunning.com or follow us on Instagram, Twitter or Facebook at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.