Hey, everybody, welcome to episode 364 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung. I'm gonna be sharing some thoughts I've been sharing with a lot of athletes recently when it comes to really thinking about building confidence, preparing not only for a big day, a big race, but also preparing to bring confidence into a training cycle. I think it might be considered perhaps on the surface a little bit cheesy for some of you, but I ask that you bear with me, because we're gonna be talking about channeling your inner superhero. We're gonna be talking about channeling your inner superhero in this episode. I'm gonna talk about both what are the characteristics of what that looks like and how you can relate to the idea of being a potential hero. And two, I wanna talk about what it means to actually put that into action in your running life to get the most out of yourself. Again, it might sound cheesy to you off the surface here, but I'm asking you to bear with me. This is a chat I shared with, or a concept I shared with our group in Columbus when I was doing my pre-race talk there. And the themes of that talk keep coming up in conversations I'm having with runners. And so I thought I should put it out on the podcast, and I hope it helps you. Before I get there, a couple of quick notes, or one quick note. I wanted to remind you that the Rogue Renegades, the virtual podcast group that I coach is currently open, will be open until about January 27th. So you've got about 10 more days to sign up before we close it again until June. So if you want to jump in now, that is my virtual podcast group. If you're training for races of any distance from April through June, then we have a spot for you. And it's a great community of virtual athletes, and you get access to me and James Dodds as coaches to help you along the way to whatever your goals might be. You can check that information out at roguerunning.com, click on the train button, and then click on virtual group training, or you can email us coaching at roguerunning.com, and we'll get your questions answered. So that's my quick announcement. Now let's jump in on this topic, because I am a little bit limited in my time to record today, and I want to make sure I get through everything. But I'm gonna be talking about this idea of what it's like to, or what it looks like to embody the ideals of being a hero and to allow that concept to build confidence for your race or for the training cycle to come where you might be chasing a big goal. And this topic came to me over the summer, essentially, when I saw a quote from the great actor, Tom Hanks, where he said, a hero is somebody who voluntarily walks into the unknown. A hero is someone who voluntarily walks into the unknown. And that quote quickly became a favorite of mine because it made me think about all of those athletes that I coach and that I witness who are voluntarily walking into the unknown of a race day, where they don't know what's going to happen. They don't know if they're going to be able to get their goal or not. They don't know if they can run what they want to run for 13.1 miles or 26.2 miles, but they step into that space anyway. And so the beauty of that quote to me is that it defines a hero by the action of stepping into an unknown, and that is independent of the outcomes. So, simply by being the one that steps into the unknown, regardless of whether you get the goal, that is heroic. And then as I was kind of running with that concept, I was thinking even internally that there would be a lot of resistance from people about that idea of, can I be a hero or is this activity heroic? And so it got me thinking about it further and doing more research and trying to put together what it looks like to embody the ideals of a hero. And then I came across this paper written by a couple of academics by the name of Philip Zimbardo and Zeno Franco, who wrote a book called The Banality of Heroism. Banality just means the boring nature of heroism. And essentially, they wrote a paper that talked about how you can make or normalize the acts of being a hero. And one of their quotes from that paper is this. It says, by conceiving of heroism as a universal attribute of human nature, not as a rare feature of the few heroic elect, heroism becomes something that seems in the range of possibilities for every person, perhaps inspiring more to answer the call. So their whole paper is on this idea of how can we all embody the ideals of heroism simply by working on it, by thinking about it, by taking steps in that direction. And so this podcast is an episode that is designed to help you do that for yourself. Now as you listen to me, you may be thinking, well, that's crazy. I, speaking about yourself, am not heroic, or I can't be a hero. I am not that person, and I understand. We'll talk about why I think everybody can be. The other thing you might be thinking is, well, the act of running is silly, and is not something that could embody or manifest heroism inside of it. The idea of doing a race isn't heroic because it's not big enough. It's not saving someone from a dangerous moment or vanquishing a bad guy or something like that. And I understand that thinking. I mean, we're used to watching heroes in the movies, and we're seeing them in those big moments. But I would submit that running itself can be very heroic. What we do is heroic because of the ripple effect it can have on others. And as somebody who coaches in this sport, I'm the one, and has been doing that for a long time, I'm the one that gets to zoom out and see the ripple effect of brave action, of those that set a big goal, those that do the work to get that big goal, those that step into the unknown on race day, not knowing whether or not they'll get there, but put themselves in that space anyway. And then ultimately get it, maybe not the first time, but the second or third time, because they've tried again and again. And the ripple effect that that can have on others in their life, whether they be runners or not, that then has a ripple effect in the lives of others, not just in their running lives, but in the lives of others in terms of inspiring confidence, in terms of inspiring hard work, resilience, the ability to get knocked down and get up again. And those ripple effects are massive. And they extend well beyond the simple act of putting one foot in front of the other. And I get to see that all the time. And that is why I do what I do. Because yes, it's about the running, but it's also about so much more. And the ripple effect that it can have on your life and on the lives of others by being brave by stepping into the unknown and performing, by getting knocked down and getting up again is profound. And I get to see that every day. It's hard to see it perhaps when you're in it, but I can just tell you that it isn't trivial, that there is an element of it that can be heroic. So what we're going to talk about today is how can you one, embody on the first half of the conversation, how can you embody heroism or what does it look like to be the part? And then also, how do you put that to work in a way that will help you in your next race or in your next training cycle as you're trying to be brave? So there we go, an ambitious episode today, an ambitious intro, but as I've had conversations with people, prepping them for races over the last several weeks, these concepts keep coming up and so they're too important I think not to share in this broader platform. So here we go, I've got four things that define a superhero that will hopefully get you to start thinking that you too can be one. The first is that they come in all shapes and sizes. Heroes come in all shapes and sizes. I think sometimes on the surface we think of heroes as the big, the strong, the fast. But when you look at heroes both in movies and in real life, however they might be defined on the news or wherever it may be, oftentimes they're people that look just like you and me. And sure, maybe they go into a phone book, or sorry, go into a phone booth and turn into something else. But they're normal people that look like just like you and me that show up and perform in an outsized way when it counts and when it matters. And I would submit that we're all exactly that. And even if you look at the movies, there's the superheroes that have different characteristics. There's the kid that can be a superhero. There's the mom, the sister, the brother. If you look at the Incredibles in one movie, there's also a huge range from superheroes that are the strong and the fast to those that are the thinkers or those that can have other superhero powers that aren't necessarily based on just being at the pinnacle of humanity from a physical standpoint. So that's the first thing, is that heroes come in all shapes and sizes. You already know that because you've seen it, but it's a little bit about changing that storyline because the first thing we think about when we think about heroes is that they are this pinnacle of humanity that is a physical specimen that you can't be. And that's just not what this is about. Even if you are a physical specimen, it's about more than that. So that's number one. Number two, a hero doesn't typically call himself or herself a hero. If you see that person who stepped into a dangerous situation on the news and maybe saved a life, and people are calling him a hero, most of the time, they're saying, I'm not a hero. I just did what was required in the moment, or what was asked of me, or they might say, I did what anybody else would do in that moment, that you hear quite often. But heroes aren't walking around parading as heroes. They are often the ones that are quietly acting in that way, or maybe hiding their heroism. As if you watch the movies, and only bringing it out when the moment calls. So it's okay. And it's normal that you don't necessarily think of yourself as a hero. But I still want you to embody it and to learn to act as one. Third thing here, a hero typically runs towards the challenge. They're the ones that are facing down difficulty. They're the ones that are running to the risk. They're running to the dangerous situations. They're running to the situations where they're needed. And I would submit that that's exactly what it looks like to be a hero, stepping into the unknown, as Tom Hanks said, is heroic. And again, if you can embrace the idea that you're not going to be able to do it, you're not going to be able to do it. You're not going to be able to do it. You're not going to be able to do it. You're not going to be able to do it. You're not going to be able to do it. You're not going to be able to do it. Heroic. And again, if you can embrace the idea that doing so in any capacity, not just in running capacity, can have a ripple effect on others, then you can embrace it in the context of whatever you might be facing down. Then the last characteristic of a hero is that all heroes have an origin story, a story that shaped them, a story that made them who they are. And I don't think that we spend enough time in our running journeys, reflecting on that, and reflecting on what it means for us. And oftentimes, those origin stories come from quote humble beginnings. They have starting points that might be meager, but then ultimately build to being something heroic. And everybody has a different journey. Everybody has different ups and downs along that journey that have shaped them in unique ways. And so I would encourage you to think back on how far you've come from wherever your starting point, from being that beginner runner who wasn't facing down these challenges to now being the one who's listening to podcasts every week to figure out how to do it and how to get the most out of yourself. What is your origin story? How can you embody it and embrace it? How can you carry it forward with you? It's not about dwelling in the past or looking at the past. It's more about reflecting on it, caring for the strength that it is built, and also just having that appreciation and gratitude for how far you've come, because we often focus too much on how far we still want to go. So every hero has an origin story. What is yours? So there you go. Hopefully that opens your mind. To the idea that you too can be a hero, because again, heroes come in all shapes and sizes. They don't necessarily call himself or herself a hero. They run towards challenges. They step into the unknown just like you're doing, and they all have an origin story, a starting point that wasn't necessarily heroic. So hopefully that allows you to relate. So then the question is, what do I do with that? How do I embody that in the context of a race or in the context of taking down a big cycle of training that might have a goal on the other side of it? And I've got five things for you to think about here. The first is that a hero stays calm in the face of execution. A hero stays calm in the face of execution. My Renegade co-coach James Dodds will talk about the idea that he wants people to be as calm as a Tibetan monk when they're showing up at a start line. So if you're showing up at a start line, or if you're showing up at the start of a big workout, I want you to embody that calm. Be as calm as a Tibetan monk. Or one time I did a talk on a race where I had a gif of a sloth laying on a hammock. And so the other concept here is you could be as calm as a sloth, relaxing on a hammock, because that's what it takes. You know, if we go back to what I talked about last week about the Houston Marathon or any big marathon, for example, you're going to have some logistic at the beginning. You're going to have to wait in line for the port-au-vates. You're going to have to stand in the corral for a long time. You're going to have to do all the things in advance before you get to the start line that might take much longer than you would hope or like or think. So the question is, what are you going to do with your energy? Are you going to spend it by being anxious, nervous, over the edge in those moments? Are you going to stay calm, breathe, and face it like a superhero would, which is to stay calm in the face of that difficult situation. And sometimes this is where I pull out a third category of mantra, which is that the start line mantra is another mantra to consider. And we talk about rhythm mantras and fight mantras for during the race, but you may need a start line mantra as well, which is what's the word phrase image that you're going to go to to help you stay calm when you're preparing for that big moment, whether that be a race or workout. So that's the first thing superheroes do. The second is that superheroes have a superpower and they lean into it. By definition, it also means they have a fatal flaw. But as I said on my talk on this, Superman didn't think about kryptonite when he was going to fight the bad guys. He thought about the fact that he was fast as a speeding bullet. So focus, think about and focus on what is your superpower. And I would submit that we all have one. And we can all bring it out to our advantage on race day. And it can look like a lot of different things. Maybe your superpower was being consistent in training. And you can bring that superpower to bear because you've done all the work. You've checked all the boxes. Maybe your superpower is the ability to stay calm, as I already mentioned. Maybe it's to overcome, to face down challenges and to come back again and again. Maybe it's being consistent with paces and executing them as rhythmically as possible. That's one of my superpowers when it comes to racing. Maybe it's positivity and the ability to smile and look at the positive no matter what happens. Maybe it's the fact that you're a good teammate and you lift up other people. So you can spend time or part of the moments of the race focusing on how to do that for others while you're also executing for yourself. Maybe it's sheer grit and determination when it gets hard. Maybe you're the one that can go deep, deep to the well. I don't know what it is for you, but I would submit that we all have a superpower, something that we're better at than others. And the question is, what is it for you? And how can you focus on that for whatever you're about to face down versus anything else? The third thing is that super heroes get knocked down and they get up again and again. I think we sometimes on the service have a perception of super heroes that it's all easy and smooth, that they're the ones that are never on the ground. But if you think about any superhero movie or anybody that we consider heroic, they all have trials and challenges. I mean, super heroes get their ass kicked in movies before they come back and vanquish the villain. And the same is true for all of us. So it's not a perfectly smooth journey as a superhero. It has ups and downs. There will be moments of the race where it's hard. There will be moments in training where it's hard. There will be moments where you fail. There will be moments when you feel like it's not going your way. And the question is, what do you do about it? And the superhero keeps going. Superhero gets knocked down, gets up again. The superhero works through it and uses all the mental tips and tricks that I've talked about to navigate the challenging moments. The superhero doesn't quit until they get to that finish line. So what will you do when you get knocked down? What will you do when it gets hard? Will you fight? Will you work through it? Or will you let it win? So that's number three. Number four in this category is superheroes have sidekicks. They don't do it alone. They get help. They channel the work of others. And I think that's something we forget about, especially as runners, because we show up on a start line and maybe we're by ourselves or we're surrounded by people, but we're doing it alone, running for our time, running for our specific goal. But how do you channel others in that? And maybe you have training partners. Maybe you don't. But maybe you have other people that inspire you. And so my advice is that everybody needs a sidekick, and that sidekick might change from race day to race day. And it might not be somebody that's physically with you, but somebody that you can channel. So if you're in a race, one example of that would be to be thinking about a person or maybe multiple people that inspired you with their race finish or with their ability to produce a result. And how can you, in your minds, I bring them with you and channel that power that they inspired you to bring. So who is your sidekick when it comes to race day? Put a face on it. Don't just think about it generally. Who is your team? And again, it may not just be a runner. It may be somebody that inspires you in everyday life. It may be a friend, a relative, a partner, somebody who has inspired you. Bring them with you. And again, it might be just in your mind's eye, but bring them with you and think about how you're going to use their help. Because sidekicks typically have their own strengths as well. And so think about how those sidekicks can work for you, because you're not doing this alone. Running is only a solo sport if you want it to be. And I would submit that if you bring a sidekick along and you're going to need it, because all superheroes do, then you'll be stronger for it. Another thing I've talked about on here before is every time you hit one of those timing mats, if you're on a race course, it's a way for you to communicate with those who are supporting you back at home. You're sending a signal that goes both ways. Yes, it's from your timing chip to the system, out to the servers, to whatever the device they might be tracking you on. But then also, in my mind, they're sending energy straight back to you. And it's a reminder that you're not doing it alone every time you cross one of those. So think about who your sidekicks are. How are they going to help you? How are you going to channel that? And then the last thing on this relatively short and sweet talk to do is to engage the eroic imagination. Engage the eroic imagination. Which is doing exactly what you're doing by listening to this. But it's also spending time afterwards thinking about these things I mentioned. Thinking about what your superpower is. Thinking about what your origin story is. Thinking about who your sidekick is. Visualizing, putting those tools to work. Because visualization, as I mentioned on the last episode, is a powerful tool that engages the mind, yes. But also sends neurological signals to the body that are similar to those that you're using if you're actually doing the thing. So engage the imagination. Build it up in your head. Be the superhero. Maybe do something as crazy as give yourself a superhero name. Again, these things sound cheesy, but I promise you this stuff works if you're willing to set aside those those doubts or those ideas that it might be cheesy and just engage the imagination, the childhood imagination. Then when we were kids, we did it. We played superhero. We pretended to have superpowers. We play with our friends. We vanquished imaginary foes. And in this case, I want you to do the exact same thing as an adult. Think about your superhero name. Think about your superpower. Think about your origin story. Visualize using a sidekick to your advantage. Again, all things that might just occur in your imagination, but I think truly can connect to what you're doing if you're willing to set aside those concerns about it being cheesy or silly. So use it. Visualize it. Think about it. Write stuff down. Noodle on it. Carry it with you. I think a part of that is also potentially thinking about what your superhero outfit looks like or is. You know, what's your cape? And it might not be a cape, but it could be a certain singlet or a certain pair of shoes or something you wear on your wrist or something you write down on your hand or arm that helps you put that mindset on. You know, if you think about what Clark Kent did, he went into a phone booth and came out Superman. He wasn't a superhero as Clark Kent, but then came out Superman. So maybe that's you. Maybe you're not going to be Superman all the time. Maybe you're Clark Kent and you need to engage the imagination so that you can go into an imaginary phone booth and come out with a mentality that allows you to embrace the heroic side of racing. So, there you go. To wrap again on the how do you embody the superhero side? It's one, stay calm. Two, figure out what your superpower is and lean into it. Three, get knocked down and get up again and again. Four, think about who your sidekick is and how you can carry them with you. Five, engage the heroic imagination. Now, as I wrap this short and sweet episode, that's hopefully bite-sized and maybe you can save for another day, I want to talk about a couple of Brene Brown quotes that I love. One is this idea that in her words, you can choose courage or you can choose comfort, but you cannot choose both, not at the same time. So by stepping into the unknown, you're choosing courage, you're choosing to face the edge. The other thing she says about courage is that courage is not the absence of fear, but rather the ability to face it. So being heroic isn't about the absence of fear. It's not being fearless. It is facing those fears. That is the magic. And I think you can do so better with this idea that we just talked about. How do you embody being a hero? Brene Brown also shares this quote from Teddy Roosevelt that I think is powerful in this space, which is, he said, and she quotes him, the credit belongs to the man who is actually in the arena, whose face is marred by dust and sweat and blood, who strives valiantly, who errs, who comes up short again and again, because there is no effort without error and shortcoming, but who does actually strive to do the deeds, who knows great enthusiasms, the great devotions, who spends himself in a worthy cause, who at best knows in the end the triumph of high achievement, and who at worst, if he fails, at least fails by daring greatly, so that his place shall never be with those cold and timid souls who neither know victory nor defeat. And the thing is, if you have a big goal, if you're on a start line, chasing it, if you're willing to step into the unknown, then you are not a cold and timid soul. You're a hero. And that heroism, as I've seen, can have a ripple effect on so many. So I encourage you to embrace it. So there you go. That's my speech on trying to be a hero. You may have rolled your eyes, you may have not listened anymore, and that's really just the Cliff Notes version of my talk on this topic, but that hit all the high points, and I hope it can help you. I hope you can look past the cheesiness and really embody the idea that you too can be a hero. So with that, we'll wrap. As always, you can check us out at roguerunning.com or check us out on Instagram or Facebook at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.