Hey, everybody, welcome to episode 397 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung, joined by co-host James Dodds. Today, we're continuing to step through the details of each training phase. Last week, we talked about aerobic strength. This week, we're talking about the race-specific phase, the all-important race-specific phase, the final phase before the taper. So we'll dig into that shortly. But first, just welcome. How's it going, man? How we doing?

Thank you, and doing well. I know we covered taper last week as an intro, but my head's still... Still feeling it. Well, I'm just thinking about all the athletes. Yeah, we're getting close. So it's hard to... If just asked randomly, what are you thinking? That's what I'm thinking. Eugene, Boston, Captain K.

Taper time, yeah. Speaking of Captain K, the capital $10,000, for those that don't know, that don't live in Austin, it's the biggest 10K race in Texas, I believe. And I believe it's on track to be the biggest ever, around 25,000 or so runners this weekend here in Austin, which is always a good time, always a great race, challenging course to be sure. But if you want to do a fun, cool 10K, then come to Austin for that. This happens to be race weekend coming up. I know we've got a lot of people in our Rogue community doing it, and there's anxious anticipation about it, especially because the weather looks at a minimum warm and humid, and possibly also rain and thunderstorms that might impact race morning. So all eyes are on Sunday morning, long range weather forecast for the moment, for those that are local Austin runners doing that race. But always an exciting race. One thing I appreciate about the Cap 10K as an organization, and I know the race director well, is that they just do a really good job of giving back to the local community year round, not just around the window of their race, which I think is part of the reason why it is such a great race, because it builds this year round community, and not just one that focuses on a Sunday in April. So anyway, an aside for those Austin runners, but for anybody else, come check it out sometime. It's a great one. But yes, taper for many people, from those racing this weekend to Boston next weekend, Eugene after that, I think we've got Glass City. So a lot going on, a lot going on, and everybody's preparing their minds for the big days. And hopefully they've been diligent about their race specific phase, because if they have, then they'll be in a good spot, which is what we're talking about today. It's the icing on the cake. It's the cherry on top, so to speak, of your training. And if you've built your base appropriately, built your aerobic strength appropriately, then you're going to get to this phase. And it's all about putting the finishing touches on, making sure that you can sustain race pace for the distance you're targeting. So we're going to step into it today. We'll talk about what it is, which is self-explanatory, but we'll dig into that a little bit. We'll talk about the goals for this phase, the guiding principles, and then the types of workouts similar to our discussion last week. So let's start with the first question. What is the race-specific phase? I know it's pretty self-explanatory in the title, but how do you think about it beyond just those simple words?

Well, I've always been a fan of this guy, and I've dropped his name before. I'll drop it again. But in my mind's eye, I pictured Chaco Willink, the big, strong, powerful Navy Seal, saying, get dialed in. I mean, this is your opportunity to get dialed in. And in a fun way, too, I would say that for those who really love challenge and really love pushing themselves and really love kind of like finding the limit of their boundary and see all that through the lens of excitement, growth, and fun, I would say it's an opportunity, or this, what we're going to talk about today is like, they finally get to say, yay, like we're like, we eventually talk about it. You know, like a lot of what we've said thus far is like, focus on effort, build up your miles when in doubt, go slow. So this is that opportunity. This is that window of training that you've been preparing for, and of course, don't lose your wits. This is also a window of training that ultimately still prepares you for race day. So it's not an unbridled phase. In fact, last week, when we were talking about effort, this week we finally get to talk about specificity, or precision, I think, was the word that you had used last week. So we get dialed into race pace, but we're also still doing fast workouts. It's a mix of those two. So those are my first two thoughts that come to mind.

Those are good thoughts. Yeah, it's the final touches. It's the final coat, I think, in an analogy perspective, of like painting something, painting a wall. You've used art analogies before. In this case, I would think about painting a piece of furniture, or staining a piece of furniture, or painting a wall. This is the final coat, the finishing coat, the clear sheath that goes on top of the well-stained piece of furniture, or the finishing coat on a bedroom you might be painting. And so it's the last step, essentially. The final hay in the barn, as we like to say. There's the quote that leads off this chapter, which by the way, is chapter 12 of our book, is from Mia Hamm. I'm not going to get it exactly right, but I'm going to paraphrase. She basically says, in training, we're basically accumulating the fuel, so that when it's time, I'm ready to light the match. And so we're not ready to light the match yet. That's race day. But this is the final kind of fuel assembly, making sure you have everything dialed in and are ready to be precise when it counts on race day. And so that's what this is about. So we spend most of our time, as we'll get into, preparing to run race pace comfortably and efficiently, and also doing workouts faster than race pace so that we can make race pace feel easier. So those are the big aspects of this phase, but let's get into it in specific, which is kind of the perfect segue. The goals for this phase, we've got four. And I'm going to cover them quickly, and then we'll drill into each one. So one is to dial into race pace, as I just said. Two is to sharpen your speed so race pace feels easier. Three is to ride the edge of fitness, but stay healthy because none of this is worthwhile if you can't get to the start line ready to go. And then four, finally prep the mind. Make sure that the mental preparation has been done in addition to the physical. So let's start with the first thing. Dialing into race pace. And there's some physiological aspect to this, in a sense that we're still building fitness, so to speak. But when I think about preparing to run race pace in the race specific phase, to me, it's more about getting comfortable there, being efficient there, learning how to find that pace and do it efficiently. And it's more about those things than it is about necessarily physiological development at this point, because if we've done our job well in building the base and building the aerobic strength, the physiological development should be more or less done. And now this is about just adding specificity to it around specific paces.

Yeah.

So what would you add to that?

Just that it's a combination of things. It's like, I think of it as like zeroing in on a bullseye. So it's like, you know, not every workout just has to be MGP for marathoners, and not every workout has to be HMGP for half marathoners. But you're kind of tightening in. You're like zeroing in. So I don't know that I have much more to add than what you had mentioned.

You're zeroing in, you're working on finding it, you're developing efficiency there, and you know, in our training programs, and we'll talk about workouts in a second, you don't need to spend a ton of time at race pace. For me, it's more about the frequency of getting there and finding it and staying there, and then getting out of it and coming back to it. So for us, I mean, the longest stint I might prescribe for marathoners at marathon pace might be five miles, and that's for a more advanced runner. For half marathon pace, it's going to be probably two to three miles max. So we're not talking about really long stints. I think some people, when they think about preparing and dialing into race pace, they think about doing, you know, for marathoners, 10 miles at marathon pace or something like that. It's not about that, but it's just about finding it and giving yourself frequent opportunities to find it in this window of time. Staying there, being efficient there, getting out of it, coming back to it, and again, we'll kind of get into workout specificity in a second. But I just want to make sure that people understand this isn't running a long run at race pace. You know, this is doing very targeted work at race pace. Second thing we do in this phase is we sharpen our speed. As we will talk about later, we work on VO2 max essentially to make race pace feel easier. So if you're running a half marathon, you're going to spend some time at 5k pace. If you're running a marathon, you're going to spend some time at 10k pace. If you're running a 5k, you might spend some time at 3k or mile pace. So it's going past that point of race pace, getting into that harder space, but with the fitness to do it, so that then when you go back to race pace, you're like, oh, okay, this feels easy. Right?

Yep.

And so that's a second goal for this phase. Again, also pretty self-explanatory. I think the key with this goal though is to just make sure you're not overdoing it, not getting greedy with it. You know, I think about the workout I had today for my April marathoners. We were doing our classic kind of late stage race specific or even taper workout of 800 meter reps at 10k pace, which is one of our staples, kind of late in marathon training where you're hitting faster than race pace at 10k pace only for 800 meter intervals, typically with relatively short rest. But the challenge in that workout isn't necessarily hitting the pace for most runners. At that point in their journey, it's about not overdoing it, not getting tempted to go beyond 10k pace. And rather than pushing to 5k pace because they probably can at that stage in training, you want to make 10k pace feel easy and as comfortable as possible so that then marathon pace feels easy when you go back to it. So it is sharpening speed but it's not in a greedy sense, if that makes sense.

Absolutely. And instead of responding with more from my brain on that, I actually was reminded this was asked in our virtual training community sometime within the last four to five months. And it's an athlete that's listened to your podcast quite a while, trained with you in the Renegades, now training with Team Rogue. But she had asked, I've heard Coach Chris say he likes working half marathon pace and 10k pace for full marathoners, but then like 5k to 10k for half marathoners and what you just said, 3k to mile for speed. So why? That was her question. And we answered it, of course, in that environment. But I think it'd be great for you to extend your perspective to everyone listening.

Well, I mean, why? Because one, it's faster than race pace. So it kind of checks that box. Two, it's not so fast that it breaks you, basically. So you're trying to find that balance of sharpening speed, but not pushing the envelope too much so that it breaks you. In the case of marathon training, when you're doing 20 mile runs in this window of time, you're probably doing race specific long runs where you're really fatiguing the legs and you're at higher volumes. To go beyond 10k pace would be greedy because, yeah, you could do it probably. You probably have the fitness to do it, but you're taking risks that's not worth taking because you're accomplishing the goal of making marathon pace feel easier, but in a pace range that is less risky. And the same for half. If you're used to running half marathon workouts and you've built that muscle and your volume's a little bit lower than marathon training because you're not doing 20 mile runs, then the same thing. You can get to 5k pace and do it without as much risk. And then obviously, that kind of message scales all the way down. So that to me is the primary reason, because it checks the box of being faster and working speed without the risk that is associated with going faster, depending on, again, where you've been developing your range. I think also with speed, like if you're doing a speed track, for example, and you're working on building towards a 10k, you've already been doing a lot more work in the 5k to 10k pace range, so that when we're asking you to go to 3k or 1 mile pace, then it's not as demanding as if you've been mostly doing work at half marathon and marathon pace, and suddenly we're asking you to drop down to mile pace. So it's a cumulative load question, a risk-taking question, and making sure you're balancing those things.

Yeah, yeah. I like to think of it as like the definition of the word speed in this phase of training. There's no getting around the fact that, yeah, we're still going to work VO2 max, and so yeah, down weeks, I'm still going to be working 5k pace regardless of the event, et cetera. But as like a shift in the brain, I like to think of speed as it relates to the event, just like we had started off with specificity of training, and cover that in this chapter. I'm like, yeah, well, 10k pace compared to marathon pace is really fast, you know? So thinking of speed in relationship to the pace, I'm going to have to run for 26 miles. And so same like you just said there, like 5k pace in relationship to half marathon, it is fast work as it relates or compares to half marathon. So there's a way of thinking about speed, I think, in this phase with a little bit of a loose definition. But I'm trying to keep in mind that, yes, there's still systems we'll hit. You still have to hit VO2 max. But generally speaking, I'm like, I'm not asking, can I rip quarters faster than I ever have in my life? I'm asking, can I sustain a pace for 26 miles? Right.

A good nuance to the answer. All right, so that's second goal. Sharpen speed relative to race pace to make race pace feel easier. Third goal is we're riding the edge of our fitness and trying to stay healthy. As we talked about in the aerobic strength phase. In that phase of training, in the base phase of training, every decision you make, you're leaning on the conservative side. When in doubt, do a little bit less, go a little bit slower, or make the conservative choice. In this phase, it's when we start to find that edge. But keep in mind, it's six or seven weeks out of a 20 to 24 week cycle. This is a small window of time, and it might be happening for you. 12 total weeks, if you're only peeking twice, 12 total weeks out of the entire year where you're really riding the edge. That's it. I think most people think of riding the edge more often than that. But we're really talking about only three months out of the year, six weeks out of a training cycle are you riding the edge. And this is when you do it. When in doubt, you're making this slightly more aggressive choice. Obviously being mindful and not doing anything silly. But when in doubt, you're going up to the edge of the pace you're trying to target versus pulling back from it. You might do all the reps in the workout, even though you're not really sure whether or not you've got one more in you. So you're finding that edge but doing it with the right balance so that you don't push yourself over the edge. But this is the only window of time where we're doing that. You know, this isn't something you start 15 weeks out. This is something you start for marathoners, perhaps nine weeks out, accounting for the fact that you have a three-week taper. So that's another goal for this is to actually make those slightly more aggressive choices so that you can find your edge of fitness. Without going over the edge, but that is easier said than done.

Yep. And I think the key thing is what you, I'm glad that you went out of your way to say like, it's during this time. Because back to thinking about what all gets out on the internet and how we take one-liners, it's like, I remember going through just a maturation process in life itself and discovering that, oh, I don't need to find one-liners that I use for every day of my life, for all of life. Rather, the maturity is revealed in knowing when to use what one-liner to guide you. So there's this idea of appropriateness. And it's like, here it's appropriate. But as you mentioned, if you're in the priming phase or you're in the aerobic strength phase, it's sort of like, no, don't take that little 60-second clip you heard online and say, from now on in every single workout, I'm always going to go to the edge. It's like, no, this is the time now. Now, you can go to the edge and you can apply that.

Yeah, which applies in workouts, in long runs, you know, any choice you're making. The other thing I want to remind people here is that when it comes to signaling to your body that a big thing is coming, you know, we talk about peaking, and peaking partially is a X-the-nose thing where some of it's dictated by what's happening to you, the stimulus that's being applied based on the X's and O's of the training program. The other part of peaking is the decisions you make and the signals you're sending your body about whether or not it should be ready to go. And this is a phase, because we're stepping towards that edge, where you're making those choices as a signal to your body that, hey, we're getting ready to go. It is time to find that peak so that you're really ready to go on race day. And these subtle decisions on the margin about conservative or slightly more aggressive choices help indicate that. And so I also want to remind people that that that's a part of your responsibility in the race-specific phase is signaling the right signal, sending the right signals to your body to say, hey, it's about to be go time. And that is also easier said than done. It's also something I think you learn over time because there's a fine line. As the concept of the edge implies, there's a fine line at which you're sending those signals versus going too far. But that's another part of what we're trying to accomplish here.

But it's interesting you had just said that line of going too far because I was thinking you should have a rough idea of what that line is now. I'm not saying in the first week of race-specific, the race-specific phase of training that you should know exactly where the line is. But hopefully through those effort-based phases in the priming as well as in the aerobic strength, we wanted you leaning towards the effort side of things because one, we want to keep you smart and continue to build the system that's going to prepare you for this. But two, it's also just okay to not know. Your body's receiving these workouts and changing, and receiving these workouts and changing. And so there's a responsibility, I think, on the athlete to have a rough idea. You may have a 10 to 12 second range, or even 10 to 15 second range of what your marathon goal pace is or what your half marathon goal pace is. And this is that time to whittle into it through each workout for those five to seven weeks.

One of the ways I think to do that is to step back on your training program just to be, just to give an example of what it looks like. Step back from your training program. And in this window of time for marathoners, three to two, three weeks out to nine weeks out from race day, or for half marathoners, two to eight weeks out, look at your workouts that your coach has prescribed or engage your coach in this conversation and go through the process of kind of circling the ones that you know are the big ones. And they should be fairly obvious if they're not have a conversation. But those are the workouts where, you know, I like to say it's business time, you know, where it's like, you know, the big ones, you know, the capstone workouts you're doing, you know, the ones that might make make you, you know, your sphincter's pucker, like you're getting a little nervous for. And those should be fairly obvious, but circle them on that training plan, circle them on the calendar, because then you can show up on those days and say, okay, it's time. I remember a story of doing a 10K cycle with Team Rogue here in Austin, and we have a classic 10K workout that we like, a two one two workout where you do two miles, one mile, two miles at 10K pace with a 400 meter easy jog recovery between each. So that's a big capstone 10K workout for us here. And I remember a relatively new member of the group showing up that day. And as we were jogging over for the warm up, he was talking about, well, you know, we're going to start a little conservatively on the first rep, right? You know, thinking we would start slower than 10K pace, kind of work down to it, maybe over the first mile, and then, you know, hit 10K pace on the second mile of that first interval. And I just remember looking over and being like, nope, nope, we're going straight there, buddy. We're not overdoing it, but we're going straight there. The point of this workout is to be as precise as possible the whole time. Obviously, don't overshoot, but, you know, and if you're going to miss, always miss slow. But in this case, it was a matter of miss slow for a lap, but not for four laps. And I remember him just being like, oh, okay, it's time, it's time. So yeah, you can circle those workouts and you'll know, you'll know. All right, the fourth thing as we dig into the goals is to prepare the mind. We're doing this throughout the cycle as we've discussed, but in this case in particular, you've got eight or nine weeks to go till your big day. This is the time to start preparing the mind and to bring up those things that will help you get there. And there's a whole mental prep side of the book that we'll get to in other episodes. But in this case, it's, what does that mean? In my mind, it's one, remembering your purpose, kind of reflecting back on why you signed up for this race and this goal in the first place. Using that to translate it into tactical goal, tactical mental tricks that you can use on race day and perhaps start using in these final workouts. For example, creating mantras for your race day. Another thing to do here is starting to visualize the race. You know, this is something for me. I start in earnest six, seven weeks out from race day where I'm starting to visualize the race in small chunks. Not all at once necessarily, but on an easy run, I might start thinking about the start line and that start line experience and visualizing what it's going to look like. So you start to step through those things. So then in parallel to getting the body sharp, you're also getting the mind sharp.

Yeah. I like to... I don't think I have a ton to add, except that one of my favorite one-liners is, this is what I came for. And it's also what you've been preparing for, in the same way this will prepare you for race day, it's what you've been preparing for with all these weeks of volume building and moving through different workouts. It's like, all right, this is what I came for. And that's something you're going to have to say to yourself on race day anyway. Not only at the start line, when the butterflies are crazy and you're worried about what's to come, but also when you're in it and it's getting rough, you'll have to whisper again, this is what I came for.

Yeah, prepare your mental toolkit in this phase as well. No need to start that in the taper face. All right, so those are the four goals. Dial in the race pace, sharpen your speed to make race pace feel easier, ride the edge of your fitness, and but stay healthy doing it, and then four, prepare your mind. Let's talk about some guiding principles that weave into those goals. And the first one that we'll talk about is in stark contrast to what we talked about last week with the aerobic strength phase. With the aerobic strength phase, we talk about effort being king over pace. In this phase, pace generally trumps effort. Now, that's a rule of thumb. There are situations where effort is still king, but in this case, in general, pace becomes more important, because we're wanting you to dial into a race pace as an example. And that's going to be something that's associated with a specific pace per mile plan that you put together for race day. And so by definition, you need to create some precision around that. Where in the prior phases, it's more about finding a general effort zone to get the fitness building goals that you want. So that's in stark contrast. And again, this is only a six or seven week period of time where that's true, pace trumps effort, but it is important.

And what I would mix in there is the part we just came off of, and that's visualizing race day. It's like, there's two parts when it comes to precision, and you mentioned this earlier in the 800s example, but it's like also not going faster than. And so it's like, if it is a rough workout, then I'm going to encourage people, like if you're having a rough day, I think the goal there is to visualize the later miles of the race where you know that it will be required of you to push yourself to that standard and say, it's within my reach, but it's going to take a lot for me to get there. It's like, okay, that's when you're pushing. And then also don't undervalue the idea of control or the word precision when there are moments in the workouts that you actually feel so on top of it and you're tempted to go turn your 10k pace workout as prescribed into 5k results because also in a race, you're going to spend the first half, control, control, control, control in some form. You're actually spending so much of your mental effort in to hold yourself back early and play it wisely and strategically such that you can race away at the end. And so I think it's like not only do we visualize when we're doing these specific workouts, but we can visualize different parts of the race in based on how the workouts going. So if you're in a hold back day, picture early miles when you're on a, I'm not my best man, but like I'm trying, I'm trying here. Then it's like, okay, push, push in, but stay specific there and picture later miles.

Yeah, that's a good dot. Because one thing I always tell people is that I actually don't mind it in this phase of work when workouts go poorly. You know, everybody wants perfection in this phase of work because that's what makes them feel good. That's what validates them. That's what says, hey, I'm on track. I'm doing all the things I need to do. But for me as a coach, I like sometimes for it to go poorly for a couple of reasons. One, because that's just the reality, right? You're never, as I like to say, there's no such thing as a perfect training cycle. But two, it forces you to deal with the mental side. And that, again, as we just mentioned, is as important in this phase of work as the physical athlete who is doing a workout this past Friday, a day early for his long run because he was traveling on the weekend, but he was prepping for Eugene and had his final race simulator long run workout for Eugene in three weeks time from that point. And it didn't go that well. I mean, the first part went fine, but then the last five miles or so, the wheels kind of came off and he fought through it anyway, you know, stayed true to the effort that he was trying to achieve and tried to stay on it. But it was just too hard. And I think part of that was the weather was gross here in Austin and the humidity probably caught up to him a little bit in a March time period when we're not really acclimated to that yet. But he told me what happened. I said, look, honestly, I don't mind it at all. In fact, I liked the fact that you had to fight because that is real life when it comes to the marathon. And as someone who's done a lot of marathons, I've had great marathons after really bad final race prep workouts. Better to happen then than it is to happen on race day. And so, you know, for me, I don't necessarily look at workout outcomes as any direct correlation to how someone can perform. It's all a bunch of data points, not just one single data point that matters on that point, that front. But it kind of gets to what you were talking about, which is that when pace goes off or wrong, stay in it, because the mental prep that comes with that is important, too. But yeah, I also like the point you made about the precision. It's not too fast or too slow. It's kind of right in the middle, and you want to be developing the specificity around the paces you're trying to target, especially when it comes to race-specific pace workouts. So pace trumps effort in this phase. The second guiding principle, again, that's kind of in contrast to the aerobic strength phase. In the aerobic strength phase, we talk about when in doubt, take the conservative choice. In the race-specific phase, when in doubt, press. Take the slightly more aggressive choice. Again, as we've already eluded, there's a limit to that. Don't go crazy. Don't do anything silly. But when in doubt, when you're not sure if you should go a little bit faster or do one more rep, then in general, in this phase of work, you want to choose the slightly more aggressive choice. And there is magic to learning that balance, but you have permission to be aggressive in this window of time. So maybe take it if you want.

Yeah.

Right? And why is that? I mean, part of it is, you know, I think, you know, we talk about this idea in Rogue of being fit enough to train. And I think this is... And that usually is applying to the transition from the base phase to the aerobic strength phase. It's like, okay, I've built the base so that I can now start doing, quote, real workouts. And in this phase, it's a similar corollary where, okay, now you're fit enough to make those choices. You know, like before, if you're in the aerobic strength phase, you're not yet fit enough. You're still building volume. You're still putting together the pieces of the aerobic system. And in this phase, those pieces are assembled. You're at peak volume. You've got the catalog of workouts to build strength behind you. And so now, when you're making those choices, you've got the musculoskeletal resilience that's been built up over the course of 15 weeks of work, perhaps. And so now you're fit enough to make those choices. It's not like we're drawing an arbitrary line in the sand and being like, okay, now you have permission. That's just, we're making it up, but you have permission now. It's like, no, no, no. You have permission to make those choices because you've earned the permission to make those choices with all the work that's come before.

Yeah, I'm glad you went that direction because you had said earlier it's about signaling. So yes, it's like a twofold approach. It's like you're making a proactive decision to signal to the body to peak. And then also, yes, it's like just like another maturation curve where it's like you've done the work in order to be ready for that sort of risky decision. And we're not promoting recklessness. I think the words subtle and nuanced come to mind here because it's like subtle shifts. Like we present it in one hour increments week by week because we're going through the book. And so it can make it seem like it's like, oh, all right, well, in the base phase, it's just this hodgepodge of like speed development. And then there's all these effort based broad strokes in the aerobic strength. And now I'm hyper hardcore. It's like, no, no, no, hyper doesn't want to enter the vernacular here. It's like we're just shifting and narrowing and kind of pressing in. And hopefully you've been paying attention through the whole season such that you can make these sort of educated choices about when to back off.

It's in the framework of your plan, right? It's the difference between if your rep range is six to eight, it's the difference between doing six or seven in the aerobic strength phase to doing seven or eight in the very specific phase. You've upgraded just a little bit, but all within the context of the appropriate training plan. So nothing extreme here. But yes, you have permission to press a little bit in this phase. All right. Third guiding principle is we want to minimize the noise and distractions. You know, I think this one can be tricky to remind yourself of this. But in this phase of work, again, only six weeks within a bigger training block, maybe only 12 weeks a year. This is when you make some boring life choices, you know, to put it bluntly, right? Like we're not going out late on a Friday night, we're, you know, we're reining in our decision making, we're not adding stuff to our life, we're subtracting or at least maintaining, we're getting permission from our family, partners, spouse, friends to be a little bit of a curmudgeon for a window of time so that, you know, while we're adding all these final stimuli and making these aggressive choices, we don't choose a stress option outside of our training world that's going to push us over the edge. And again, that can be, I think, hard. You know, I think most people, if they're training for a big race like a marathon, I think mostly that's an easier one to kind of be like, all right, you know, I'm going to buckle down in this window of time. I think if you're looking at shorter distances, half marathon or 10K or 5K, I think sometimes people think, well, I have permission to be a little bit more whatever, loose in this window of time. But I would just encourage you, if you're serious about a goal, whatever the race distance is, that you be a little bit of a monk in this phase of training, regardless of the distance. And don't let the perception of the challenge trick yourself into being, you know, making choices that are going to compromise all the work that you've done.

Yeah, it makes me think of just like something's got to give. That last piece you just mentioned, I'm like, go ahead and make good on your investment. It's like if you've, even if it's shorter, like you said, if you've been putting in minimum 12 weeks at this point, that's only short end of things, you've already got 12 weeks invested. And sure, a lot of it might have felt like rough drafts, et cetera, but the mileage got up there, et cetera. I'm like, go ahead and see it through to your point. The other thought was I was thinking of the idea that something's got to give and the air is thin up here. So I was thinking of a mountain. It's like we've talked about the pyramid before, bigger your base, higher peak. And now that we're in this whole race specific phase to push us towards that peak, I picture a mountain, literally, if you're climbing it. It's like the air, there is quite literally less oxygen. And in this case, oxygen is just your energy for other things in your life. Now, as an extrovert, I have to whisper to myself, hey, be careful of forever thinking, i.e. this isn't forever. We outlined it in the book. It's five to seven weeks. So this is that one window of time that I can quote, be a monk and challenge myself to. I think the introverted athletes with a high level of like self drive, they're like, yeah, no problem. Thank you. I finally like get out of my way coach. You're finally letting me crush this.

For me, I'm like, this is the phase I dream for. It's like I get to sell every day. I'm not going to hang out for a period of time and love it. I do think you have to be careful of taking it too far. And you want to make sure you're still feeding your energy. However, that comes, you know, again, as you said, easier for introverts, perhaps harder for extroverts. But to me, it's just again, I mean, I don't, I don't want to tell people how to live, but it's just on the margin, you know, do a little bit less or, you know, go to the movie versus going to the club. You know, like these are subtle life choices that are going to make sure they're not stealing from your training energy and the power that you can bring to these final finishing touches of this phase of work. So minimize the noise and distractions. The other part of this is not adding anything new that would be perceived as a quote, good thing. You know, this is not the time to add a yoga routine or to change your diet or to add strength if you haven't already. You know, we don't want to add things either that are perceived good things that would help our training in our race outcomes because you have no time to assimilate it. Right? So those can also be distractions, you know, in a different sense where it's like, oh, you know, I'm going to want to go start Pilates because I've been slacking on my core work. It's like, no, no, no, no, no, no. This is not the time to do that either. So in addition to the more fun distractions, avoid the ones that might be perceived as, quote, good ones if they aren't a party of your routine already.

And I can relate to those ideas popping in my head, and that's where specificity of training is a good recall, just as a mental tactic. No, instead of being like, oh, what if I tried this new class or something? It's no, put that intention, that energy, that effort into that medium long run, because they're long at this point. Put that energy, attention, and effort into almost in a ritualistic fashion. I take my medium long run seriously. I take my quality day very seriously. And a lot of the athletes we coach, they take every bit of it seriously anyway, but I'm just saying, when those ideas pop, redirect them. It's like, no, instead of new, simplify.

Yeah, what can you do? Or just double down on the things that matter you're already doing. I think something to really think about in this phase is, how can I double down on recovery? Not in a way that's adding a bunch of time to your routine, but more in a sense of just precision and making sure you're on top of it. Things like fueling appropriately and rehydrating appropriately after long runs and workouts. Like, all right, if I just had a big effort, what am I going to do to, one, give back to peeing normally as quickly as possible to make sure my body has the hydration it needs to rebuild itself? How am I going to get good, filling well-balanced macronutrient meals in the 90-minute window post-workout or post-long run? And just, you know, maybe in the other phases, you're a little looser on those things. But in this phase, it's like, no, no, no, I'm going to be dialed in on it every time because all of those things are going to matter when I'm dancing on the edge. So minimize the noise and distractions. And to put it in another way, focus, focus on the task at hand and what really matters. All right, so those are goals and guiding principles. Let's talk about workouts, types of workouts. We've kind of alluded to some of these already. There's four kind of general types, and these are all, in a sense, versions of each other, really, because they all, in some ways, overlap, in terms of what you're trying to accomplish pace-wise. But we've got race-pace workouts. We've got VO2 max or speed kind of oriented workouts. We've got our favorite in-and-out workouts, where you're going between the two to help make race-pace feel easier. And then we have our big race simulation workouts, which these would be long-run workouts in our world, where ideally you're running longer distances, you're working in race-pace in that long run, perhaps also doing some in-and-out work in there, and to the extent that you can, trying to mimic the terrain of your race as well, so that when you're doing those things, you're doing it over elevation that looks similar to what you might face on race day. So those are the four categories. Let's start with the first one. Give us some examples of just pure bread and butter race-pace workouts.

Well, one, you can honestly, the most simple pure bread and butter is like three to five miles at your race pace. Like if it's marathon, like I might assign something like five miles at marathon pace with a warm up and a cool down. Over time though, I've gotten to where I do like to tweak just a pinch because like when I started, I was talking about zeroing in on the bullseye. I almost prefer like if I was to, I know myself at this point, it's like typically if I'm thinking five continuous miles at race pace, I might change that to start the first one 20 seconds slower if it's marathon pace, and just drop 10 seconds per. So like there's a progression within it. A staple one that I've used quite a lot lately, and I've even put variations of it in long runs is just, we call it the MGP Sammy around here, the MGP Sandwich, but it's two miles at marathon pace. Put that middle at half marathon, and then come back to two more miles, so there's no recoveries. That is a very race-specific workout, and that shock in the middle is not only gonna cause lactate accumulation, and then you recover at your race pace, but it's also, it's just increasing the rigor of the workout, which is pretty intuitive to most athletes. They're like, oh yeah, like, this is something I'm gonna run 26 miles, then five's not so scary, even though in a given day, that can still feel like hard work. Still, just the idea of increasing that middle mile is a great way by which to increase the rigor of the workout.

Yeah, I like to call that one the shrub sandwich. I think he was known for that, that type of workout often done fart-like style instead of by mileage, but yeah, it's a good one. Another one that we like, bread and butter, is just two to three times two miles or two times three miles at marathon pace. You know, as a marathon example, or two to three times two miles at half marathon pace as a half marathon example, 10K reps or 1K reps at 10K pace for 10K runners or perhaps 800s, depending. So those just simple, straightforward intervals where you're just getting in the work. You know, again, we like to break it up some where, and for me, the reason I like that is because, and others may have different reasons, but for me, I like that because you get into that rhythm at marathon pace for two to three miles. You have recovery. Often I'll say two to three minutes recovery. I don't really care about the recovery that much. I want it to be long enough that they recover from the work, but also long enough so that they kind of get out of rhythm, you know, because for me, it's also about them being able to find it again. Like, I think, you know, and I've had people complain, complain in air quotes to me, well, why don't we do longer reps at marathon pace? It's like, well, I like the in and out, or to at least have the breaks, because then that gives you more chances to find the pace. And finding the pace is as important as being able to hold it, from my perspective. So those are some simple examples of race pace, but it's really simple. You know, it doesn't have to be super long segments, but you're going to do short, manageable segments at race pace, with the goal being to make race pace feel as smooth and comfortable as possible. These are not workouts that should be that hard, you know, especially at this phase of training. They should be manageable. They should be sustainable. You should finish feeling good, strong, confident. You don't want these workouts to be tearing you down, beating you up, making you feel like you can't do it, anything like that. So race pace workout is pretty straightforward. Then we've got some pure VO2 max workouts where we're working generally kind of 3K to 10K pace depending usually in shorter intervals. What are some examples of that?

Well, the first one that came, you just said the 3K. So that's a little bit faster. But I was honestly thinking of like the Texas 10K that I got that workout first from Allison, who she said she had done it in some of her race prep workouts where it's basically all at 10K pace, but it's, you know, you've got a mile broken up into 400s with half the recovery. So 400 on 200 off, then a mile of 800s. So with half the recovery, so 400 recoveries, but 800 at 10K, then you get a nice pure mile at your 10K pace in the middle and you come back down that ladder.

A simple one again, short intervals for a half marathon or 400 meter reps at 5K pace. Maybe even working down a little bit in the later reps or 800 meter reps at 10K pace. Maybe working down depending on if you're a marathon or half marathon or 200 meter reps for somebody you might be doing a 5K or 10K, you might do 200 meter reps where you're going in and out or even shorter rest sometimes. So just simple straightforward intervals where you're hitting those faster paces is what we're talking about with these VO2 max reps. And then of course, we've got the my favorite workouts to both prescribe and do our in and out workouts where you're doing a combination of the two. And really the goal is to hit some faster paces interspersed with marathon pace or half marathon pace or 10K pace so that race pace feels even more comfortable when you get back to it. Sort of your quote recovering at marathon pace or recovering at half marathon pace. That's one goal. The other goal is to use sometimes those faster paces to generate fatigue so that you have to work a little harder to hold race pace, which kind of simulates that late race fatigue without having to do 26 miles. So that's another reason why we incorporate some of these in-and-out workouts and there's probably too many examples to think about our name. One that I've liked recently for marathoners is 400 on at 5k pace, alternating with one mile at race pace, marathon pace, in and out, maybe continuously for four and what is that, four and three quarters to up to five miles, all continuous. So it's actually 5k pace interspersed with marathon pace, but only a short 400 meter interval, and then you get a full mile at marathon pace. And so that's a fun one. I don't think it's that hard or that challenging, but it really makes marathon pace feel good. So that's one example from me, but what's a favorite for you?

Well, I thought of two examples that I think are fun, and I don't want to say that my fear is that it might make things confusing, but I hope it's actually in the spirit of explaining things. One, for a half marathoner, I might use the Julia in this phase, which we talked about in the aerobic strength last week, because let's say that the Julia is set up something like two miles of one minute at 5k, one minute easy, short recovery, and then two miles at your race pace. You can see how, for a half marathoner, they're going to be recovering at race pace, but they got those pickups, much like your example you just gave, where it was 400 at 5k, followed by race pace. It's also where I like to put a twist on the Michigan. So typically, you might do some interval on the track, followed by tempo pace, if you're in the aerobic strength phase, out on the road. That's a way to use the Michigan. I also like to switch that for marathoners, where I do a combination of a descending ladder, so the intervals are going to go 1200, 400, 800, but it goes 1200, let's say, at 10k or half, followed by 1 to 2 miles at their race pace on the road, 800 at 10k, followed by 1 to 2 miles at their race pace, 400 at 5k, followed by 1 to 2 miles at their race pace. So it's a way by which you can even take the bone structure or architecture of workouts that we've discussed before and make them race-specific by changing, instead of tempo in the aerobic strength and a little bit shorter, now you're lengthening that road section and focusing on the race pace itself.

Yeah. Yeah, and the combinations there are only limited by your imagination. I mean, these to me are some of the fun ones to dream up. I also like to create variety with my in and out workouts just to keep people on their toes, so to speak, you know, so that you're not giving them the same thing all the time. And it's a way for them to, you know, be a little bit scared of something, go in and then have confidence coming out, because it always looks harder on paper, I think, these in and out workouts that it is actually to accomplish them, especially at this phase in training. But a lot of fun, I think, effective tool to really gauge fitness, to practice race pace under fatigued legs. And some of these will manifest inside our fourth category here, which is race simulator workouts where sometimes we'll use in and out paces to incorporate into race simulators. Race simulators are basically long run workouts where you're doing pace work inside a long run. For us, this is formative to not only develop that ability to hold race pace on tired legs, but also to in some ways practice executing all of the other elements around race day, which include not just the paces, but what you're wearing and what shoes you want to wear and your gels and nutrition and all of those things. We call it a simulator for a reason. It should simulate race day in all aspects in addition to the pacing considerations. And typically for our workouts and our athletes, we'll give them three of these typically in progression throughout a training cycle, regardless of whether they're doing a speed track, a half track or a full track. They're going to have a progression of these workouts that go from one to the next. We call them long run qualities is another word we use. When we'll have long run quality one, long run quality two, long run quality three. And they're usually an escalation from one to the next. And we always want people to do them in order because they build upon each other. And we'll have different... I have different principles with which I use in crafting each one of those levels of long run quality as well. And so those are things where we start to get a little more advanced, but it's important because it gives you that staying power. It allows you to practice all the variables of race day. And if it does go poorly, as I talked about earlier, it's a way to build mental confidence and resilience that you can fight through the hard things and still stay strong. So, I don't know, I'm almost hesitant to give examples here because I feel like out of context, they can be dangerous. We have some examples in the book, but what are some examples that you think are reasonable to talk about?

Well, I have a couple, but I thought it would be fun actually to put you on the spot and talk about two. Okay. And it combines the last two as well, but because we cover McClung special in the book, I'd love to just hear how you came up with it. And we can talk about caveats because it's made my short list of like most seasons, I'll include it. Sometimes I challenge myself not to just in the spirit of trying to continue to learn writing workouts and being creative, but it's one of mine that is on my like very short, safe, practical go-to list. And then depending on the athlete, I might modify some of the volume that we listed within it. But I think it'd be fun for people to hear like, how'd you come up with it? Why'd you, what were you doing there? Because there's three different phases to it, you know?

Let's talk about it. All right, so the McClung Special, it's a good one. The origin of the McClung Special was me just wanting to think through the best way to simulate race day without doing, for marathoners, 26 miles. And I have a version of this that's for half marathoners or marathoners, but we'll talk about the marathon version because it's easy to talk about and it's really the origin of it. But for me, I wanted to be able to simulate both the start and the finish of the race, which have different needs and skills and aren't really about running marathon pace at all. If you're at the start of a race, the goal is to start more conservatively than marathon pace and work to marathon pace. So that looks different than just hold marathon pace for three miles. And for the finish of the race, same thing. At that point, hopefully, you're feeling good and strong and trying to press beyond marathon pace. So I wanted to be able to simulate those two things, but have them manifest in a way that feels real, that feels as close to race-specific conditions as possible. And how do you do that when you're not running 26.2 miles? It's really hard, right? And so the solution ultimately was to put this gnarly far like in the middle to generate fatigue. So we have this opportunity to simulate the start at the beginning, after a warm-up, you know, after a short break, you do a hard one-one fart lick for three miles, typically, another break, and then you have that finish simulation. So the idea was, all right, I wanted you to be able to practice those two ends of the race without, again, compromising you in a way to run 26.2 miles. And so the solution was put a hard fart lick in the middle. So typically what it looks like is some warm-up and then a five-mile progression. This is the advanced version. A five-mile progression, working from marathon pace plus 30 seconds per mile towards marathon pace. And once you get there, you hold. But you're only holding marathon pace perhaps for one or two miles in that progression. Then you take a short break, usually a half mile, sometimes a mile. Do a one-one fart lick for three miles, alternating one minute on at 5K effort with one minute easy. Less important what paces you're hitting there, more important just that you're generating that fatigue in that fart lick, another half mile to a mile recovery, and then a five-mile finish simulation, where you're holding marathon pace for the first couple of miles and then trying to progress down off of that. Too faster than marathon pace, like you would at the finish, hopefully, of a marathon. So, and again, I have versions of that, and as you said, there's just kind of... There's both half marathon and marathon versions, but there's also different levels. You know, I have a version that's three miles and three miles front and back, and then, you know, fart lick in the middle. So, you can scale it up or scale it down depending on your level of experience, because that's a pretty advanced workout. But it's one of the most effective that I've ever experienced, both doing it myself and in coaching athletes, of getting you the opportunity to really practice race to execution as closely as possible without having a 26-mile burden.

Yeah, it's cool because in my efforts to create something similar, it's cool to hear you explain it because I've developed a low-resolution understanding that was almost there. I was like, it's hard to get around this one. That's why it's made the short list of great workouts. But to flip it, because like you said, that was an advanced one, and I wanted to start with it because that's an exciting one, and we do cover it in the book, so it was like, that's pretty cool. But to back up and go simple too, I've worked with athletes in the past, especially if they're fairly new to introducing long-run quality workouts. You know, across the three workouts, it can be as simple as, you know, oftentimes I'll do like three by two miles with a half to a mile recovery. The long-run quality too, so that's six miles of total quality at your race pace, but you're getting recoveries every two miles. So this is just a very small but important advancement, and I might just flip that to two by three miles with a half or one mile recovery. You could play with the recovery variable, but again, now the athletes run three continuous miles at race pace as opposed to just two at a time. And then that third, you could just do six by, just six straight miles. Maybe have them do 12 easy, six at race pace, two mile little cool down finish, et cetera. So it can be as simple as that, depending on where someone's at in their development, right? Because it's, you have development within a season, and then you also have your development as an athlete season over season. And so I have some athletes that run great marathons, and they've only built up ever to 20 miles in their cycle, and that's where they are. And so I haven't even often introduced long run qualities to that athlete. But then in their next block, that opens, I'm going to say something like, ooh, I'll get them to three or four 20 milers in the season, and I can layer in quality workouts for them now. And I might start with that simple advancement in year three with them, or marathon block three, which might occur around two year mark. Like, that's when I might first introduce some Toa McClung special, you know?

Yeah, and I think one thing that's nice as you think about it is that if you're not doing long run qualities now, then do a cycle where you do one. Do another cycle where you do two. Do another cycle where you do three. So over three cycles, you're building in all three of them, but in progression from cycle to cycle. And the way it works, I think, in our world, is that they're scaled in a way that if you're adding one, you're adding what we would consider a long run quality one and the characteristics of that. If you're adding two, then you're adding that second one, which is another step forward. And then if you're going to three, you're adding another step forward. And there's obviously variations across the types within each, but they're pretty consistent in terms of what we're trying to accomplish. So usually, our first long run quality is just a simple race pace long run quality, where it might be two mile reps or three mile reps at marathon pace for marathoners. To use a marathon example with some recovery in between, but that's it. You're just hitting marathon pace, and you're doing it in two, three mile chunks, nothing crazy. Then the second one, at least what I like to do with the second one, is add the in and out element at some level, but still manage the volume. So you're doing some sort of in and out. I often like to do it Fartlake style, where maybe it's two minutes at half marathon pace, alternating with six minutes at marathon pace, and you're kind of going in and out for some period of time, maybe taking a break and then hitting again. And honestly, I just made that up in my head. But that's the kind of thing you're trying to accomplish, is introduce a little bit of variability in in and out nature without overdoing it in the second one. And then the third one, you want it to be as close to a race simulator as possible, meaning as with the McClung Special, you're capable to kind of mimic the start, mimic the finish. I particularly want people to be able to mimic the finish, no matter what. I don't always do the start simulation with that, but you always want to mimic that progression at the end where you're having to work from marathon pace to faster than marathon pace at the end of the workout, perhaps before final cool down, so that you can, on tired legs, with other work in your legs, simulate that ability to still get faster off a marathon pace when it's hard and when you're tired. And so that McClung Special is an example. We have another one we call the McOva, which is kind of a combination of McClung name with Kanova, you know, the Kenyan marathoner coach who likes to do long progressions. And so I have another one, again, in various forms of it, where you're doing long progressions at the end of a long run, perhaps with one-mile recovery, but the one I have in my head is a 4-3-2-1. So, you know, you're warming up until that point, then you're doing four miles at marathon pace plus a little bit, like 20 to 30 seconds, depending on the weather, then going from there straight into three miles at marathon pace, straight into there at two miles faster than marathon pace, and then a one-mile cooldown. And that'll finish out of a 20-mile run. So that's an example of the McCoba. Again, we like to name things just for fun.

I was going to say, did the Renegades put that one on there for you?

It's a simulation of finishing strong on tired legs at the end of a 20-mile or 22-mile long run. So there you go. So those are some examples, but that's the idea. So if you've added one long run quality, it should look like, all right, just some race pace. You're adding two, all right, some in and out. Adding three, some full simulator elements. And that's kind of how you can build, but don't go from zero to three in one cycle. That can be dangerous. And you don't want to go from zero to McClung special, you know, right away. But that is something you can work towards, and then it becomes really formative. And if you want to think about having staying power in races, to us, that is one of the ways you build it. And just doing one round of those types of workouts isn't necessarily going to see magic where you can close out a race really well. But if you do that consistently and you stack seasons of that type of stimulus, then you will. You're going to develop that resilience, that staying power, so that when the legs are tired and you're mentally tired, when it gets hard at the end of a half or a full, you're going to be able to still get faster off of race pace. And that's the goal. So there you go. Four different types of workouts. And that's kind of all we have on the race specific phase. What are final thoughts?

I'll give the my final thought here is really the final thought that you were just ending on. And that's sort of like just similar to last week. It's like always be aware of be aware of where you are. And so, you can compare season over season. Like, we're never guys that are out there encouraging people to make extreme pendulum swings. It's like with a lot of athletes, once I've had them under for one season, I go back and I count medium long runs. Like, if they did two medium long runs at 10, I might get them to two 12s, but four at 10. And so, that's an advancement in their overall development. And same with these workouts. I love getting creative with long run workouts, and they're really fun to talk about. But in practice, it's like, again, if you've only ever run two by 20 miles and build up to a marathon, then you don't need to make a crazy pendulum swing. Like, three to four in the next block is going to be great. And if you've ever only done six miles of quality nested inside of a 20 mile workout, then an advancement to eight is going to be enough. Like, you don't, we're not trying to, like, cause big swings.

Yep. Yeah, take the incremental steps. And wherever you are, if you're not sure where to go next, change one thing, add one variable. You don't have to add all ten. But more important than that, I think it's the mindset that you bring to this phase. It's being able to, in your training, make sure that you can delineate mentally how you approach the aerobic strength phase versus the race-specific phase. And if you hear only one thing in this whole episode, then to me, that's the important thing. It's how you think about and manage those various phases as we step through them, because that's where the real magic and understanding is. And if you get that part, then the rest kind of starts to fall into place. All right, let's wrap it here. A couple of reminders as we do. One, you can always check us out on Fridays at 2 p.m. Central on Instagram Live at Rogue Running. If you want to ask questions about this topic or about your training, that's a great place to do it. We have really good questions every week. So if you also just want to jump on and learn, then do that, because we just have a lot of fun. We get really good questions, and they run the spectrum. I think anybody who jumps on there would learn from it. So check us out 2 p.m. Central on Fridays for that. Check out our YouTube if you haven't already. If you want to see us in video form, and also check out our training programs if you're interested in coaching. We've got Virtual 101, Virtual Group, in-person in Austin and Dallas. Pretty much every possible option, no matter where you are in this beautiful planet, to access our training and coaching. You can find all that info on the website. You can also just email us coaching at roguerunning.com. Again, that's coaching at roguerunning.com. If any of that's confusing and you just want to cut to the chase, then we can help you through that email. And with that, we'll wrap this one here. We'll talk to you guys next week.