Hey everybody, this is Chris with the Running Rogue Podcast. I'm here with Steve, as always. Hey Steve.

Hello world.

Today we are doing episode 25 of the Running Rogue Podcast, continuing our series on mental training. This will now be our sixth part. And who knows how many more we've got coming, but this is our sixth part on the mental training series. You can also check out episodes 6, 11, 13, 18 and 20, going through all of the different components of mental training that we've talked about so far. Today's topic is personal power, or this idea of having a warrior mentality. In a lot of ways, it probably comes first if you were to go through this sequentially, but we didn't really think you'd be prepared for it because this is gonna get a little woo woo, as Steve would say, a little philosophical today. So we thought starting there might actually cause you to never listen to us again. So we're coming back to it now that we've laid the foundation with talking about vision, purpose, goals, and some of the tools that we laid out in the last two parts of the series. So again, talking about personal power today as it relates to mental training. Before we dive into that, as always, we're starting with some current events. We wanted to give a quick update on Killian Dornett. We mentioned his Everest accomplishment, climbing from base camp to the peak of Everest and back to advanced base camp in 26 hours. We talked about that on the last podcast.

With no oxygen.

With no oxygen, no fixed ropes. Impressive. Well, in case that wasn't good enough, he decided to go back out and left from advanced base camp, went back to the summit of Everest and came back to advanced base camp in 17 hours, just under, I think, a week after he had done the first attempt. So he made another summit attempt, got there, did it in 17 hours. Apparently, that part of the route that he did from advanced base camp and back, the FKT for that was 16 and a half hours by another climber. So he didn't quite get the FKT, but still impressive. And I haven't seen any stats on this, but he has to be the only person that's ever summited Everest twice in a week with no oxygen.

Has to be.

But you, Steve, got a little more context on his first attempt talking to some climbers. So what did we learn?

Well, what we learned was evidently, and I would love for someone to share more about this with us, those of you who might be runners and climbers and know more about expeditionary stuff. I was talking to Mallory Brooks, who was one of our guests, and also Allison Maxis has been one of our guests. And they were both following Killian, and their statements to me were, haven't Sherpas been doing this at the same level or better for an extended period of time, but yet because they're not white, they don't get the kind of attention that folks, other folks do? So that kind of made me backpedal, and I was like, wow, that's very true. So we're not trying to say that what Killian did is not still amazing and incredible, and to do it twice is even more incredible, but we did get a little more context on the fact that there are others who are doing, who have done things like this in the past, but Killian being an ultra runner, Running World is now paying attention in ways that they didn't before. So again, if anybody has any more insight on this, what these sherpas have been able to do, we would love to hear from you, because we're still learning about this interesting world of trail running slash expeditionary FKT, whatever it is that Killian Durnett is doing, we're really interested in. So give us a little insight.

The last article I read on it that was giving a little bit more of the mountaineering perspective said that, this is what happened, or at least has been said to have happened, but it still hasn't been verified. His summit attempts or his summit completions haven't been verified by the Nepal Mountaineering Association or whoever does that. I actually saw a documentary on this at the Banff Mountain Film Festival a couple years ago, where there's this British woman who lives in Kathmandu who has been the keeper of all the records of everybody who's summited Everest and then some of the surrounding peaks. And basically, after someone summits, they have to go back to this woman in Kathmandu and give her the play-by-play on exactly what happened and share all the evidence they have associated with their attempt. And she's the one that verifies that it's legit.

She sniffs them out.

Because she knows everything about how this plays out, and somehow sitting in Kathmandu has figured this all out and listened to thousands of climbers tell their stories of Everest. So, Killian's still going to have to go back to Kathmandu and verify all of this.

I wonder if they're going to make him pay double the fee for having ascended twice. Sure, a sponsor will pay.

Again, impressive result again for Killian, and we'll keep following along and update you as we learn more. Now, next, we've got to talk about the pre-Fontaine classic. We'd mentioned this in episode 21 as a meat to watch out for. It's always Memorial Day weekend, and is certainly the greatest US track meet every year, maybe aside from the Olympic trials, if that's happening every four years. But it's at Hayward Field, the mecca for track and field, and it's been going on all the way back to the pre-Fontaine days, at least in some form. So it's a big deal, and this year, it was stacked. The competition was ridiculous. There's probably too much to talk about right now, but I've got some highlights, and then we can talk about them. The first we've got to mention is Emma Coburn. We've talked about her on this a couple times. We mentioned in episode 21 that she'd be one we'd be watching this track season to see what would happen with her new coach, her fiancee. Joe coaching her after she made the shift from Mark Wetmore at Colorado. She ran a 9.07 high, basically missing her American record by about a third of a second. So she was nearly under American record pace, and I think only her second meet of the year so far, she ran Doha, and this is now her second meet. So not bad for early season results and almost breaking your American record. So I think she's doing okay.

Joe's not fucking her up, that's for sure.

He hasn't messed it up yet. He hasn't messed it up yet. So congrats to Emma, and that race happened on Friday. I caught a couple of the highlights. She got gapped pretty early because that race went out fast. There's a new 18-year-old Kenyan girl, Celophean Chess Pole, who, 18 years old, she ran almost world record pace, and her shoe fell off at one point, and she had to put it back on during this race. So she was off the front, and there was a group of East Africans with her that gapped Emma pretty early. So Emma ran that American record almost by herself, which is pretty impressive.

And it seems like that's kind of the space that she's in right now. It's almost what she has to do because she can't quite run with the top, top-level Kenyans. And Ethiopians seem to have fallen by the wayside. They were really, really in a really good spot about three to four years ago, but they haven't been able to keep up with the Kenyans finally coming into it on the women's side. It took the women a lot longer to come to it. So I think she's still in that spot where she's got to get one gear further in order to be able to run with them. Or she's gotta run a little bit outside of her normal style, which is to go with them from the front and survive. But let me tell you folks, I ran the steeple myself for four years and beyond and coached it for many, many years. This is not a race you mess around with. If you go out and you fade, there are some serious consequences that can occur if you can't keep your stuff together.

Potentially face altering consequences.

Yes, and injury issues, and it's not just a slow fade to the end. It's a lot of other things that can happen.

You gotta go over hurdles still.

And they're immovable.

And one thing that was interesting, I watched one of her interviews post-race, and she talked about what she and Joe have been focusing on this season, which is more 5K and longer distance training, kind of trying to build her strength again. I guess Mark had had her work in mostly 1, 500 speed, trying to improve her top end, and she's decided to shift gears, recognizing that she's got limiting returns on that work, knowing that she's just not as fast as some.

And going back to our discussion about why that shift happened, it makes a lot, when you hear that, it makes a lot more sense why she stopped working with that group, because they weren't moving that direction. I mean, Sarah Sutherland, who I coached, is running in that group, and she's a 15.5 girl. But I think they're, I know Sarah's strengths are in the 5K area, and I know that they're probably continuing to work that 15 zone with her, because there's getting lots of return on that investment. And it's probably that they're just not gonna give her, or she doesn't have the bodies to run with to get that done. And with Joe, training with Joe, with him writing it, he's probably towing her along and getting involved in a lot of that work. So it makes a lot more sense to me when you hear that piece that she's working on that phase of training.

Yes, the other person I mentioned from the steeple, another American, finished fifth right behind Emma. Courtney Frerichs, she is the Collegiate Record Holder in the steeple, set that last year, graduated last May from New Mexico. She finished second at the Olympic trials, went to the Olympics in Rio, and just ran a PR in 919 right behind Emma, just one year out of college. She's training with Schumacher's group there in Beaverton with the Nike or Bowerman Track Club. She's one to watch, and I just hope we can have a Frerichs-Coburn rivalry build as she comes into her own post-collegiately, especially with Schumacher's guidance and what he's done with Evan Jagger and others in that group. So she's one to watch. Finished fifth, it wouldn't hit most radar screens, but I think she's a name to watch, Courtney Frerichs.

And as you've watched her, I've watched her throughout her collegiate career. She went initially to, before she ran for New Mexico, she ran at University of Missouri, Kansas City for a number of years. And she and her coach went over to New Mexico her senior year. And she is raw dough. I mean, she's gotten a lot of great work with the same coach, but there's a lot there. There's a lot more there out of Courtney Frerichs, depending on the direction that Jerry decides to go with her. So I do think you're looking at someone who has the ability to be in that really low 905. In looking at American record holders, you're looking at, in my opinion, a future American record holder in Courtney and the current American record holder trying to continue to break hers. I think Courtney might be a year away, but maybe we'll get a real competition at the US Championships this year, which would be great to see. It looked from the result that Stephanie Garcia got. Stephanie is a fighter, and she puts herself out there, but she's just not got the skill set, unfortunately, that these other two have. So it'll be interesting to watch them.

Courtney versus Emma, we'll see, US Champs in late June. OK, second race I want to mention, Women's 1500. This is one where, I think, on the surface, if you look at the results, you kind of, as an American, are kind of like, ho-hum. We had four Americans in the race, finished sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth, led by Brenda Martinez, who finished sixth, Kate Grace, that was seventh, Jenny Simpson and Shannon Robry. They were in the 403, 404 range. So if you just look at the results, to me, it's not impressive, but watching the race and reflecting on it a little bit, I wouldn't necessarily say it's impressive, but to me, this is just 1500 meter racing. Sometimes you're in it, sometimes you're not. This race ended up being a little bit of a mixed bag. They had a pacer. I think everybody thought it was gonna go out fast. She was supposed to take them out through the 1000, and nobody went with the pacer, so it got bunched up. It became very tactical through the 800 and 212, which is pretty slow for these athletes. And then it started to string.

It's slow for the top collegiate athletes, honestly.

Yeah, so then it started to string out at the end, and so it kind of became a little bit of a crapshoot, and you know, Kay Grace did a little bit of too much work early on and faded. Brendan Martinez came from way back to get sixth and had a really nice finish. And then Jenny and Shannon, I think, just never got comfortable. Jenny was fighting on the outside. I think she was gonna kind of hope that it went out fast and kind of get in line and then move up later, but she got stuck in the pack at the back and then tried to move around and was working too hard, and normally a very tactically sound Jenny Sampson ended up kind of caught out. So, as I look at it, I'm not worried about those four. I think they're all looking really strong. Plus, you gotta realize Kip Yegan, who's a young Kenyan, she split 59 seconds in the last lap to get under four for the 1500 for women, which is just insane. I mean, that's a split you might see at the end of a men's race. So, what are you gonna do, right? So, yeah, on the surface, doesn't look great for the American women, but I'm not worried.

Well, I think, I'm not worried either, but I do think you've gotta point out Laura Mears' race. She, that last year, really, in 2016, we were expecting, I think everyone thought she was going to medal in it. I think she actually had a chance to win the gold, the way that she was running, and they just didn't get her peak right for whatever reason, or she just wasn't in the place that she needed to be. To see her back and running and changing gears with those folks, it shows that the renaissance of American female distance running, especially in the eight and the 15, that has been coming on since Jenny, really since Jenny and the girl who ran for Adidas, who drops and falls, right? What's her name? Sorry. Yeah, sorry, I'm forgetting her name. Anyway, they started this resurgence of, really, American middle-distance runners running at the highest level.

But Loramir's British. What are we talking about?

What I'm trying to say is that that has been pulled along. Now the view is that it doesn't matter who you are or what you are. There's not sort of a guarantee that because you're Kenyan or Ethiopian, that you got the free pass that they seem to be having in the steeple in the five and the 10. And so it's great to see, while I think our Americans did not perform to the best of their ability at this race, that there is still this continued competition going on, and it's not just an end-all be-all Kenyan game or Ethiopian game. One other thing I want to say, crazy to think about, but the women's mile is now turning into a similar kind of racing style that the men's mile is, which is super fun. It will be frustrating on occasion. The women, I don't think, will ever turn it into a total jog fest, like what we saw when Matt Centralwitz won the Olympic gold medal this last year. I don't think they'll ever let it get to that, but it is super fun to see that that's what the mile or the 15 is all about. It's in this weird space where you can't just run all out like you do in the eight, and you can't sit around, and somebody who's just not aerobically so much further ahead in the five, where people can just run away from them, it's this cool, amazing, so it makes the mile the really marquee event that it's always been for 100 plus years. The women's race is turning into that even as much, and that's kind of a cool thing too.

Anybody can win, basically. But for me, Brenda running 403 off a 212 first eight, that's pretty impressive.

Not very surprising, though. She's been running the eights of the chain this year so far. She's been running really well so far.

I also have to mention that Kate Grace, good to see her going up to the 15. I think she'll probably race the 800 for US Champs. But her abs are ridiculous. I'm gonna put a picture of her abs on my vision board, because I need abs like that to be a strong runner. She's got a ridiculous six pack. All right, so let's talk Men's Mile. And you and I chatted briefly about this. I kind of was poo-pooing the Americans here, which now I'm talking out of both sides of my mouth, because Clayton Murphy set a PR, 351, I think it was like a four second PR for him. Huge. And he did Awesome in Rio in the eight, but it was fairly young, post-collegiately. Ben Blankenship sort of made the race, making a move with about 300 to go. He got seventh. So I guess if I think about it now in the context of what I just said for the women, if I give the men the same slack, then I would say Clayton and Ben Blankenship had pretty good races as well. The thing you were missing for the men's mile was Matt Sentrowitz. Where was he? Dodger Dodger. So there's various rumors circulating there. I don't know that I believe any of what's been said, but I've heard he had a little injury, he had a virus. I've heard some conspiracy theorists think that maybe he's leaving the Oregon Project to be coached by his dad. So it'll be interesting to see what happens with Sentrow after this.

Yeah, I don't have much to say about that because you got to be in it to win it. So fuck him, he wasn't in it, so he couldn't win it. But one thing, I watched that race four times over the last couple days. I don't know how the level of... The level that Quenboy and Managoy, or however you say his name, I can't say it right, they're going to make it tough on Matt Sentrow at the World Championships, I can tell you that. So, those guys are running at a level that is... The shift ability, the way they stay tucked in, that was how you run a fast, world-class, mile clinic put on by that Kenyon group. And you know, and Vincent Cabette, who's no slouch, just get the wheels run off of him. I mean, they just blasted him out. And I thought Clayton did as good as he could do. He ran a really smart race, we can say that for him. And in the championship race, these things go different. And so I'm bullish on his ability still. And I was really, I agree with you, I'm watching Ben take that race. He continues to be impressive. He reminds me a lot of Iguider, and I would love to see him move up to the five. I don't know that Ben's got that interest, but I know that he moved down in his collegiate career. He was at University of Minnesota, so he moved down to the 15. I would love to see Ben Blankenship move up to the five. It would be great.

The good news for Centro at Worlds in London would be he would only have three Kenyans to race.

That's true.

Instead of four or five.

Exactly.

Because the other thing is, the Kenyans got one through four, and then Asbel Kiprop, Who's out the back. Who's won gold medals and is typically world class, winning these types of races. He finished last because he's apparently been dealing with some injury and sickness issues.

He's like Kenya's version of Leo Manzano, right? Like, you don't know what he's gonna do. He's gonna come all the wins or it's ugly.

So, yeah, so those are the worst, the other thing worth mentioning in the mile is this kid, Jakob, I'm gonna-

Ingebrigtsen.

Ingebrigtsen from Norway, of all places. He ran a 358 as a 16 year old kid to become, at least as far as records show, the youngest sub-four miler ever, 16 years old, plus his brothers, not to be outdone, Heinrich and Philip were also racing. They both ran 353. One of them finished third in the same heat with Jakob, and then the other one finished a little bit back in the A race, but unbelievable trio of brothers there from Norway.

Yeah, can you imagine a four by 15 in that case? I mean, that is, like, forget it. Only Kenya could compete with them. I don't think anybody else could compete with them, and Norway, you wouldn't expect that, but it's amazing when you have three brothers that can run, I mean, 353 has moved in a mile, so it's really impressive.

Clearly the genes are good, so unbelievable.

And the coaching, too. You know, the one thing that people in central Texas might know is, Henrik ran for Texas A&M for Two Shakes of a Lamb's Tail. I think he ran for them for one semester, and it just didn't work out with the way things played out. He went back home and ended up running immediately on the international circuit and was generating some serious cash flow. But there's a little Central Texas connection.

Steve's the collegiate athlete savant over there. All right, so the next thing I have to mention is not a distance race, but a race that you and I love, or not a race, but an event that you and I love, which is the Triple Jump. This wasn't on any radar screens. I don't think they had any coverage on NBC, at least that I saw. But Kristen Taylor won it in the fastest, fastest, furthest jump ever in the Triple Jump on American soil. A Hayward Field record, certainly. And then Will Clay, his arch rival in the Triple Jump, PR'd not once, but twice and still lost the event. So pretty impressive. I know we watched these guys at the Trials last July, and the Triple Jump is just a fun event to watch. Nobody really pays attention to it. Most of the time. But these two guys are competing at the highest level in the world for the US, and they're doing it in a way that's both a rivalry and also a set of kindred spirits. They both went to the University of Florida, so they're both alums from the same school.

Yeah, Will Clay transferred from Oklahoma to the University of Florida to be able to train and work with Christian Taylor, and also their coach, the great Dick Booth, who is the greatest, one of the greatest, if not the greatest, triple jump coach in the world. He's just unbelievable, incredible. But they're training partners, they're buddies, but they are going at each other.

Yeah, when it comes to jumping, they're going at each other.

And they're completely different styles. Christian Taylor is this big old boy. I mean, he is a big, strong, he's got a finesse game, the way he jumps. He's big and strong, but he's got a finesse jump. And Will Clay is a little teeny dude who just pulls, he's got a long stride, he pulls his way all the way down the track, and then when he jumps, it's like, their styles are so different, but they're going head to head, and I can't wait to see them competing at the US. Championships and at the World Championships, because they're jumping on another level right now. And they've been at this for a while, so it's just great to see.

So check out your triple jump coverage.

And if you've never watched a triple jump, just watch, it's poetry in motion, it's amazing.

The last thing from Pree that I have to mention, I hate to end on a down note, is what happened in the men's 5K, sort of a no-show from US athletes, certainly the best US athletes, Ben True, who had been running fairly well, finished third to last, Chris Derrick, dead last, and then Ryan Hill, who has competed very well at this meet in the past from the Bowerman Track Club, DNF'd. What's going on there?

I don't know, it's called shit the bed. It's still early, right? It's still early. Maybe their training cycle, they're coming back from altitude, maybe something other things are going on. And those guys are all part of the same basic training group. So, I don't know. But I think that, I think they'll get it right and they'll get it fixed. It's such a weird time. Late May, for all of these athletes, if you're having coached at this, not quite that level, but relatively close to that, this is the time where you're trying to hedge your bets on getting yourself onto a US team. It's not gonna be easy to make, right? It's not gonna be an easy team to make. Hedging your bets there and getting the work done, having good races and getting the work done at the same time. And I know that this time of the year just sits in a weird spot. We see the Americans run really well in Stanford at the early May, but then they sort of go away for a little while, take care of their last altitude training breaks or take care of some real, shoring up the weaknesses that they found in their early season races. So I know it's a tough time for Americans where the Kenyans are sort of, I mean, anytime you're in a Diamond League race, to them, it's all about the money. And the Americans are not really going to be in the mix, likely, from a Diamond League perspective. Even Matt Centralwich is not gonna be chasing those kinds of results, at least at this point. Maybe Clayton Murphy will at some point, but not yet. So I get that. You know, one thing I was really happy to see, I mean, the Women's 5000, if you look at it, it looked nearly as bad when you look at where the women placed. But these are young, just recently out of college girls, some of them. I mean, Molly Huddle gets eighth place. Now, she's been out for a while. She's 1509. Emily Sisson, who we've talked about on this podcast, she's 1510. Mya Hall, who I coached for a while, she's at 1511. I mean, those are solid. When you talk about how, but they're eighth, 10th and 11th. Kim Conley, 514, 1514. I mean, it's pretty impressive where they're sitting, but this is not very often we see American women in the mix at a Diamond League race. Of course, we're in American soil, so it makes sense of that. But amazing. One other thing, a little shout out to Mario Hall. Amazing bounce back. She had a terrible meet at Stanford, terrible. To bounce back from, I think, what was 1530 or 40, maybe even 50, and jumping back in at 1511, good to see her getting back. And I think we might get a little, trying to get her on the podcast. We'll see.

Former UT athlete, so welcome there. But you're right, these athletes are trying to peak really for August, you know, but enough to make, enough to make a US team for late June, but really peak in August when you can show up at Worlds and hopefully compete. Now, since you mentioned the women's 5K, I mean, it's hard for me to, I don't know, I look at those results, I roll my eyes, because you got DiBaba running video game times at 1420 something all by yourself. It's like, that's just not real. But I'll save my cynicism for another day. She'll give us more opportunity. So final couple of notes here before we transition into our topic, I wanted to mention Kara Goucher and Shalane Flanagan both announced that they'll be racing, coming back from some injuries, and Kara had another surgery on her knee. Kara announced she's gonna be racing June 17th at the Yorkland Half Marathon, which she raced in 2012. That's the half marathon associated with the grandma's marathon in Duluth. So she'll be there. Now, she's really, through her social media outlets, Instagram and Facebook, kind of hedged her bets with it, saying this will be a conservative, quote, conservative race effort, and quote, much slower than I ran in 2012. So clearly, it's just a way to get out, to kind of test her legs a little bit and see where she's at. So Kara will be racing June 17th. Then Shalane has announced she's gonna be coming back to the US 10K Road Champs at the Peachtree 10K in Atlanta, Georgia on July 4th, which is always a huge race with highly competitive both US and international fields. So that'll be fun to see. And if she picked that one, it tells me that she's feeling pretty good about it. And we'll hopefully go get that US Road Champs.

That'd be awesome.

So that will wrap our intro. Now we're diving into our topic. Again, this is the sixth part in our series. You can check out episodes 6, 11, 13, 18 and 20 if you wanna go back. But this one stands on its own. We're talking about personal power. This idea of sort of giving yourself the mentality to be a warrior. And people may already be rolling their eyes. Like, where is this gonna go? So we'll start with that question, Steve. What does this mean? Where are we gonna go with this?

All right, so maybe one of the things we should talk about is the term personal power, which almost every single time I've ever said this to any athlete that I've worked with, if they didn't have a background in, say, some of the esoteric theories of Carlos Castañeda, they don't really get it. But perhaps a better way to say it is, I think of personal power as how to be the most effective human being you can be. And so it's kind of meta. I mean, it's a really big picture, 10, 000 foot view of what really truly is, so how do you live? How do you operate from a world view idea that we talked about when you set up your statement of purpose and where you're coming from to how are you gonna live that purpose out generally? Because if you can't live it out generally, you don't have a space as a human being, because we're human beings first. Before we're runners, we're men and women, we're husbands, wives, we're mothers and fathers, we're daughters and sons, we're brothers and sisters, we're other things, and we live in our work worlds, we live in all the other spaces that we do. But yet, these ideas that we're gonna talk about, they're really about being present, they're really about looking at how do you execute the most effective day-to-day living process that you possibly can. And so maybe Personal Power, it's the way I like to talk about it, but maybe how to be the most effective human being you could be is a better way to say it. So the other thing is, this is really important stuff, people. I mean, this is how you operate. This is your operating system. It's the software you're running on. And we can change it, and you can tweak it, and you can flex it, but often what I found is with the athletes that I've been coaching for many, many years, is their operating system, their software has been imported from either a family background or their family worldview or where their parents came from. Or it's, and usually for many people, that's either extremely positive or extremely negative. You usually see one thing or the other. Or those self-made men and women out there, they're cobbling this together on their own on a day-to-day basis and maybe reaching towards their religious faith for some of this stuff, or reaching towards some world philosophy. And so what we're trying to do, or at least what I'm trying to do in this personal power, effective human being module, if you will, or part of the episode that we're talking about here with podcast, it's how can you be the most effective racer you can be? And it's first to be the most effective human you can be. So that's my long preamble for why I think the concept is important to address.

So what you're essentially talking about is not just how you approach running, but how you approach life.

Because running is just one part of life. It is a big part for many of us. But as they say, food, shelter, sex, whatever they say, are our first three most important things that we worry about. So running is a little bit further down the line, and Personal Power addresses those three issues and how you get those three things on a day-to-day basis. We're a little more advanced, and so we're spending a lot of time listening to Donald Trump spout off and misspell whatever word he's trying to make that sounds like coffee or coffe or kebab tea or whatever the hell that word is. But ultimately, that's not real stuff. The things that we're going to be talking about today yes, a little woo-woo and a little big picture may be a bit meta, as I like to say, but honestly, I think folks, if you'll stay with us and you can kind of start to wrap your brain around these things, I think we'll get down the road with it. I think it'll help you.

I kind of think about it like this. Like when your eyes open in the morning, it's like what helmet are you putting on? What armor are you putting on? What are you going to battle with? What mentality? That's what we're talking about.

That's a great analogy.

That applies to running, applies to how you operate in your workspace, your relationships, all those things. And so, yeah, we're going to get a little bit deep on you, but we're not even going to apologize for it. Now, as a part of that, embracing this idea of personal power and getting your mind ready to approach life that way, you got to take stock. You got to be honest with yourself and really understand your strengths and weaknesses, which is going to require some introspection that may be difficult. So let's talk about that. How should people begin to step through this by looking at themselves first and understanding where they are now?

So taking stock or strengths and weaknesses. So truth is a really hard subject. And what truth is, we could argue about universal truth. We could argue about moral imperatives, about what virtue might be. We could argue a lot of these other things. But ultimately, truth is really a subjective thing. In my opinion, at least. I'm not a believer that there are some basic universal truths. I'm a guy who doesn't even think there's basic human rights, to be honest with you. But that's another topic for another day. But truth really is how you're going to approach what you feel is your personal imperative of what you have to do. And so, getting to the base of that, about what you hold as your truth, is really kind of taking stock of who you are as a person. And the best way to do that, or the only way to do that is the way, at least that I've seen, and I'm not, one only way is probably a little strong, but it's to kind of look at this from the perspective of what your strengths and your weaknesses are. Is getting down to brass tacks about what you do well and what you don't do well. There's a lot of folks, and as I was bouncing about yesterday, getting a lot of this information sort of distilled into something that we could actually work with, Chris, I got on the internet and just started just tapping in thoughts and ideas to see what Mr. and Mrs. Google said about things. And of course, all over there is, all over it is this sort of, how they talk about it in the business world, and business coaches about, should you address your strengths? Should you address your weaknesses? Listen, people, you gotta do both. And anybody that's gonna espouse one thing or another thing is way off topic, way off the bounds, in my opinion. You gotta look at your strengths, you gotta look at your weaknesses. As I like to say, in the running analogy, we wanna work your weaknesses early and your strengths late, but we've got to work both sides of this puzzle and to try to figure out ultimately where we are, so that we can try to encourage positive feedback loops. And I think that that's what taking stock is. It's like, how do you look at the things that you do, psychologically, physiologically, in your space? What are your habits, in a sense? And so, you have habits or you have tendencies that are a weakness for you, that aren't your best, and you have things that you're much, much better at. And each of us, if you take stock, and you sit down and you'd be really critical with yourself, you can come down up with two or three of them to really determine where you think you're standing there. But again, these weaknesses or strengths, they are sort of looking at where you can get some pull or some benefit from getting philosophical, getting a little bigger picture. And folks, these first ones we're gonna talk about, this one's pretty practical. I mean, it sounds a little weird, a little bit of a woo space, but it's a lot more practical than some of the other ones we're gonna talk about. It's, you want to start to do anything we can possibly do to try to start to create positive feedback loops. And our weaknesses are constant and consistent stoppers of positive feedback. So you wanna look at it and say, so what are my real weaknesses? And this is not as a runner. I'm talking about my weaknesses as a human being, because believe me, whatever your weaknesses are as a human being, they're gonna play out in your running. So if you don't wanna talk about this from your human being sense, and you wanna step back and plug it back into the mental training for your running, and you just don't wanna look at the big picture, talk about it from a running perspective, and you'll be able to, and I guarantee you, if you give me a little time, I'll be able to walk you right back into how they function in your day-to-day life.

One-on-one with Steve will get you quickly to your humanity. So, how do we do that? I mean, what are the steps you recommend to looking inside and figuring out what you need to work on?

So, let's start with your weaknesses, right? Because that's, as I said, that's where you really wanna go. You wanna go there early. The first thing you wanna do is sort of, you just wanna take stock and recognize and accept that you're seeing these weaknesses accurately, and that you're accepting that they're a challenge for you. So, it's just sort of like we talked about in many of the other aspects of this mental training protocol. We talked about being real and being honest and being open and seeing clearly. It's just recognizing and accepting that you're not perfect, and it's okay. And no one's gonna be in that space. But to be the best you, to optimize yourself, you've got to begin to just look and see and accept that that's where you currently are. When I say accept, I'm not saying, accept that that's the way you're gonna be for the rest of your life. What I'm saying is just recognize it and say that's the starting place that you're gonna work from. After that, if you've got the means in terms of the financial means, or you've got ready at hand, Chris, you and I have talked about this many, many times. It happens to be the business that we're in. But finding a coach is crucial, because you're gonna have blind spots. You're going to have places that you're gonna see weaknesses as one thing. But if you get around a coach, and I basically think a running coach, a really good running coach, is also an incredibly experienced life coach, because every coach of runners has to deal with people and in their life. And so, honestly, I sort of see myself as fulfilling two roles. I do think I could probably make a whole lot more money being a life coach than I could make being a running coach. But I'm not interested in it. And I like to see people's lives run through the gauntlet of running, but find a coach who can help you sort of see the background that you're not seeing. That can give you a bigger picture in saying, okay, you see that as a weakness, but maybe something's more of a weakness, or maybe that's not as big a weakness as you think and something else is. But it'll help you kind of clarify how that plays out. If you don't have a coach yet, I wouldn't start with them and say, I was listening to this podcast, and they were saying I should just look at my life and find a coach to help me figure out what my weaknesses are. Not a whole lot of, other than me, not a whole lot of coaches are probably gonna jump on that. You might too, Chris, now that you've been down this road enough. You're probably down with that. But you do want to just say, what are my weaknesses? A runner, and then you would be able to sort of patchwork that back to how that fits, or step that back to how it fits.

Well, it also requires, I think, as a new coach to somebody, you're also getting to know them. So, it takes knowing somebody and having maybe some time with a coach before they can really assess some of these things. And certainly, early on, they could ask you the hard questions and help you work through the process and make sure you're being honest with yourself. But you also have to have a little bit of a relationship before a coach can say, no, I'm seeing this, or you may be missing something else. The other thing I would say here is that it seems also that you could find a close friend, a partner maybe, that knows you really well, who you're already having deeper conversations with, that you could test some of these things with.

For sure. Yeah, I agree. I don't know that it has to be a coach, but I do know that it needs to be done because we have a tendency just, as I talked to at first, about these are habits. These are things you're doing innately, probably subconsciously, certainly unconsciously. So getting another person's perspective at minimum is a crucial piece of this puzzle, in my opinion.

One time somebody asked me the question, if you could change something about yourself, what would it be? Is that what we're trying to get to here, or is it different than that?

I think that that is a starting place, and maybe another starting place. I said that one starting place is to look at your running and go back, but that's also a great place. You know, this is a question, anybody that's been in a freaking job interview, the stupidest question they ask you, and the hardest question to answer is, what are your weaknesses? Right? I mean, it's like, wait, wait.

You can't be honest in a job interview.

No, you can't. You can't tell them what your real weaknesses are. So ultimately, I think what you're looking for is someone who will do that, right? So, yeah, I think that that's the case. But one thing, the next point on this is really, really crucial, folks. If you're like me, you're gonna come up with about 18 weaknesses right off the bat. You gotta be really careful here. You can only work on one of these at a time. So if you write 18 of them down, go through them and try to figure out which one you think is sort of the most, either the easiest to deal with because it'll give you a positive feedback loop pretty quickly to start working through these challenges. We'll talk about that in a second. Or pick one that's in the middle there, or pick the hardest. That's a lot gonna deal with people's personality. I don't really have a lot of advice about which weakness to tackle, but just be sure that you're only tackling one at a time. And the reason for that is that you don't wanna be, it's like we talked about with training, you don't want to start mixing the number of variables that could be coming into play as you're trying to fix something. Because the more variables you have, the harder it is to determine which is most important. And as we find out with weaknesses, once you start addressing one, you really are starting to get the skill set necessarily to address the other ones. And quickly, it can turn into a positive feedback space, and gain that sort of positive feedback loop that we're looking for.

So, we're looking for one or two or maybe max three. So, one at a time or a few at a time. What do we do with them once we have a, once we think we have a good feel for what those are?

Then you gotta make a plan. Just like we talked about in all the rest of our, all the rest of our training pieces, you have to say, okay, this is what it is. And believe me, if I, if you asked, if somebody else asked you about their weakness, Chris, you'd be able to come really clear with a plan for them. It's much harder when we do it for ourselves. We have a harder time sort of recognizing the way out of the woods with ourselves, but somebody else's answers aren't gonna be authentic, and they're not gonna be easy for you to, none of this is gonna be easy, let me just say that, but it's gonna be a lot better if you come up with that plan yourself. Even if the plan isn't immediately effective, you'll, if you're willing to work a plan and just start saying, okay, let's say, for example, my challenge, my weakness is that when it going gets tough, I tend to fold like a chair. When it really starts to hurt, I say, I get a little wonky and I wonder whether I really wanted the thing that I wanted, did I not want it? So if I say it there, okay, so what really is that? What is that when I start to hurt, I don't wanna be there? It's probably that I don't like to hurt and I think that not hurting is the way I think I'm supposed to get there. But as we all know, generally in life, the hard way is the best way because you've got to get there. So what I might say is how do I make a plan to put myself into more challenging spaces? Or when I'm in a challenging space or in a place where I wanna fold, can I name it, recognize it and say, okay, I see you and go back to the very beginning, recognize and accept it, recognize it's there, accept it, then work through that plan. And that plan is hard for me. Again, this is stuff that, I'm not a licensed psychologist or psychiatrist. So I'm getting advice about big level things that I don't have a lot of answers for each individual, but you should be your own doctor. As that great quote says, physician heal I self. I mean, person heal yourself. What that plan is is probably not so important that what the exact steps of that plan are is that you're working a plan and you're looking and checking to see, are you effective or not? One thing I could highly suggest in this plan is ensure that you're starting to keep a journal if you talk about these things. If you're going to go through your weaknesses, it should start with a cost-benefit analysis as I talk about in economics, and sort of go through that as the first steps, and then just keep working it and keep writing it down. And you're going to quickly and clearly begin to see much more effectively where you can make adjustments.

I think another way to phrase the question as I reflect on it through this conversation is if you answer the question, what's holding you back? Whether it be in running, a career, in a relationship, whatever, what's holding you back? Then that is another way to kind of dial in to this concept of what are your weaknesses. Well, let me ask another question. This is kind of off script, but I've been thinking about it recently because you had referenced some literature on strength and weaknesses, and there's some literature, especially in the business world now, that says don't worry about your weaknesses. Just focus on your strengths, because that's more positive, and you can't change your weaknesses, so you just focus on your strengths. So my question isn't, I don't really believe that personally, so my question isn't about that, so to speak, but I do have a personal philosophy that people don't change. They grow, but don't change. So there's certain things about you that are kind of fundamental core, that are in your DNA, and there's certain things that you can grow, adapt, mold over time. So as you're going through this identifying weaknesses, what if you run up against one of those things that you just think is just you? And how do you know the difference between that and something that you should be working on?

Well, then I would challenge the person and say that's probably a strength. But you may have every one of these things that we talk about has a light and dark to it, right? And a good, a shadow and a bright. And you may find that what you think of as a weakness, as really a strength, you're just highlighting on the dark part of that. So it's like everything has to have a good and a bad, a yin and a yang and an up and a down. It's just the nature of life. The Tao is real, okay, folks? I don't care what you call it by, but it is. It has to have both these sides. And so maybe what you're looking at as a weakness is really not one necessarily. It's really a strength that you're just focusing on the bad side of it. It sort of brings up the last two points that we're talking about with this weakness, which is, number one, you got to be reasonable about what you can expect, because weaknesses, it may be that that's just not something you can change, Chris, but it will be something that you at least should be able to recognize and shore up. I don't ever believe that anybody actually stops. Very rarely does anybody ever take a weakness and turn it into a strength. It nearly never happens. I think it's very, very rare that you see that, unless it's a karate kid or something else, right? It's usually some storybook movie or fairy tale about it. The best we can hope for, which is a huge and amazing result, is to hope to make it a zero-sum game and hope to get to the point where it's not necessarily supposed to turn into a strength, but at least not an overt and obvious weakness. But it comes back to this idea at the end, which is you also, no matter what happens, you gotta go and be positive. Because if all you're doing is hammering and focusing on this, that's why we work our weaknesses early. It's because you can sort of work through it and work through it and work through it, but at some point in time, you just have to say, if you can't get there, you just have to go positive. In some sense, I like to say, make it till you make it, say it, say it, say it, and it will be. That's a little facile and a little bit easy, but you do have to stay in a positive state. You can't go through this process of looking at your weaknesses and then just deciding that you're a horrible, terrible, no good, very bad person.

When that person asked me the question, what would you change about yourself? I could really only come up with one thing, which is that I'm awkward in big group social situations, especially if I don't know anyone. If I know people, it's no big deal. If I don't know anyone, I'm awkward, because I, one, hate small talk and the menial nature of it, but, two, I'm also an introvert, and so being around a bunch of social energy like that just makes me anxious, and I don't enjoy it, and I'm extremely awkward, and most people who meet me in those settings think I'm an asshole because I'm uncomfortable and I look like an asshole. And so it's interesting reflecting on that answer now in the context of what you just said, because that very thing that makes me awkward in social situations like that makes me someone who can really connect with individuals one-on-one. So just giving a little personal anecdote there.

I think that that's exactly what we're talking about here. As you've heard me reference this before, it comes from my biblical background sort of growing up in the church. You're wrestling with the angel. In that analogy where Jacob was wrestling with the angel, he was wrestling with his own issues and his own self. And what I'm asking people to do here is to wrestle with your demons there and wrestle with your weaknesses and try to determine how you can get on top of it. Because if you're willing to do that and you're willing to take the time and energy to do it, you're going to get some serious return. And when you hit the dark night of the soul, when you hit that really bad patch in the middle of a race, you're going to know you've got the skill set necessary to take care of that. And if you don't, then a lot of these things shake your core. I mean, I know I've talked to athletes when they've gotten done with a hard fought race that they thought they were completely prepared for, but they hadn't done too much psychological work or mental training work. They come out of it shaken in a deep, deep way. Metaphysically shaken. And they have a hard time getting back on the horse. But you've got to get back on the horse and ask yourself some of these questions, especially this sort of low-hanging fruit of SWAT analysis slash strengths and weaknesses and determining where you can sit there.

I think when you have your weaknesses identified clearly too and just to have awareness of them, even if you're not able to beat them right away or improve in those areas right away, that awareness over time kind of builds, I don't know if the word is right, but resilience to eventually do something about it. We talked weaknesses, but as you look and address and identify those, you also have to, as you say, be positive and then identify and focus on the strengths as well. What are the tricks on that side of the equation?

So one of the things is people will say, you know, it's sort of like, people will say the flip side of what you said about the business stuff, about don't ever work on your weaknesses, work on your strengths, right? Yeah, but working on your, I agree, but you got to work both ends. And I think that working both ends requires you to, you know, if something, most people who think that they have a strength, they really haven't worked their strength because it's intuitive, it's natural, it's what they're good at. They never had to work on it. And because they never had to work on it, they'll just take it for granted. Working your strengths and going through your strengths, writing them down, and I would suggest these five different ways of dealing with it, or is it six? Six different ways of dealing with it. Recognize and accept your strengths, find a coach, talk through that with, look at your strengths one at a time, work a plan with your strengths, be reasonable with them and be positive. It's a whole lot easier to do all of those things with strengths, but many of us don't do those steps, we don't take those steps because we think we're just good at it. If you're good at it, intuitively, naturally, basically, how much better would you be at it if you did it? Just because a guy can shoot a pretty good, got a pretty good stroke, you know, in playing basketball, doesn't mean that he can hit 98% of his freaking free throws. You think Steph Curry, his strength is hitting an outside shot, like a circus shot. But the guy works the circus shot all the time. He continues to work on his strength to be sure and know that his strength is still his strength and that he works there. He probably also works his defense. He already probably works his foot pattern. He probably also works not overreacting to not getting the call and other things. If you watch Steph Curry over the last two to three years, as I've watched him pretty closely, I used to hate him because I just thought he's just lucky. Now I watched his improvement in his game, and man, if you can't tell that that guy hasn't continued to work very, very hard on his game. And he's super impressive now to the point where you just expect him to make that shot or to do those crazy things because he's worked that strength and continued to make it that way. So remember, folks, just because it is a strength doesn't mean that you don't have to apply the same amount of attention to it and use those same six steps through to work your strengths just as much as you work your weaknesses.

So before we go to step two, step one, as we just discussed, is sort of take stock, identify your strengths and weaknesses, and start to work on those. Before we go to the second step, it's important to note that the timing for this probably matters at some level. Now, if we're talking generally about life and personal power as a mentality broadly, it probably doesn't matter when you start, but if you're going to apply this to your training cycle and you have a marathon in six months, you should probably do this early on, just like we talked about identifying your purpose and creating your vision board and goals early on in a cycle.

Yeah, you work your strengths late. You work your weaknesses early. And we do that physiologically. As a coach, when I write my training protocols for my marathoners, I frequently have a lot of 5K work early on. Number one, I know I get a lot of bang for my buck from an efficiency standpoint, but I also know that my athletes are not going to want to work on that too much later on because it's not a facility they have that's easy for them. They're not great at it. It hurts. It's painful. They don't see it so much as a positive feedback loop. And again, I want to remind everybody, all four of these points, these meta points we're talking about, but especially this one specifically, is about creating positive feedback loops. It's about creating spiraling upward mentality and psychology, and hopefully life goals will get achieved, life happiness is better, because you're building and building and building up. You don't want to go into your biggest, you don't want to go into a really big job interview talking about all the things you stink at. You want to go into the job interview thinking about the things that you've done really well, that you do really well, and you want to focus and highlight your strengths as much as possible. And even in that question that we said, where people could ask that question in business scenarios, what's your weakness? You're supposed to pivot to a strength, right? You're supposed to take that to pivot to a PowerPoint. And so that's what we're saying about the timing of this, is be sure that you're really focusing mostly on weaknesses early on, and then taking these steps and working on them at the end. And this is one of those things, it's like, it's not do this or do your training. I mean, this is do your training and do this. They need to be doing at the same time, and it's a great way to start really recognizing how these mental training tools can be dovetailed into your actual physical periodization and training cycle. We're going to talk about that in subsequent podcasts, Chris, just about how you implement these mental training programs into a periodized plan. But what we're saying here, here is the basic template, the way you want to look at it, which is work on those things you're not so great at early on, maybe halfway through, two-thirds of the way through, and then make sure over that last third, the last half of the time frame that you're in focusing on your mental training that you're really working all your strengths.

So step one, take stock, identify those strengths and weaknesses, and start working on them. Step two, we've laid out here, is owning your past. You call it radical responsibility. What does that mean?

So this is part of the thing, one of the things that people think I'm crazy about, but basically, we're all victims. All of us, given our natural state, the way that human psychology works, at least in the modern era, I don't remember my past lives if they existed, but I know in this life, we are told it's a psychological strategy, or we learn quickly that the psychological strategy is to continue to talk about how we're not responsible for the bad thing that happened to us. And so that trickles down quickly, because it's a strategy of effective psychology, and I will say on occasions, in the most distressful scenarios of war, a tragedy that being in a spot where you have a fall guy or a fall girl for the thing that happens to you can be effective. But at the end of the day, it doesn't change the fact that you're absolutely responsible, no matter what, for everything that happens to you. I get a lot of grief for this when I tell people this, because they say, how in the world can I be responsible if someone plows into me in a car? I didn't create, unless you went through the red light, in which, yeah, you're gonna have to take responsibility whether you like it or not. This is not what the police officer decides who's culpable, who has responsibility. It's you stating, this happened. Something caused this to happen. Whether you're absolutely responsible for the initial cause, you are certainly responsible for any action or reaction that occurs after that happens to you. To think of it otherwise is to be a victim. It is to stay in the space of saying, this happened to me, I'm not responsible. You may not be culpable, legally, but you will have to deal with it, even if you had nothing to do with it, even if you got rear-ended from behind with no idea, even if a lightning bolt from the sky hits you in the head, you did not create that. Unless you're standing on top of Enchanted Rock in a thunderstorm, well, maybe you have a little bit there. But regardless, you still have to deal with the fallout of that. And so you are responsible. You're responsible to deal. You're responsible to manage. You're responsible to handle. And to give that power away, to give that away, to give that, it is not being, not having personal power. It is stating to the universe, I'm a victim. And yes, I understand this is not necessarily a politically correct statement, or at least a politically correct sentiment. But folks, it's the law of the jungle. It's the way it works. It's the way life happens. Shit happens. This is another way to state having radical responsibility. Shit happens. Deal. Now, the flip side of this, the third point is, you have a choice. You have a responsibility, yes. But you also have a choice. So those who want to say that, oh, you're just giving, you're just telling everybody who had some trauma happen to them that they just have to deal, well, they do, don't they? So flip it. Take that coin and flip it to the other side and have the freedom to choose. Creating your future. You have to own your past. Once you own your past, you now have an opportunity to create your future. And you have the ability to start to look at each one of these decisions or each one of the steps along taking full and radical responsibility as an option and a place for choice. Because believe me, in the spaces of our universe, in our world, especially in our current world, the thing that humans want, and my belief is that humans want this thing more than any other thing no matter what they say. They want freedom. Everyone wants freedom. To be truly free, you have to be radically responsible.

We're getting into the woo-woo now. Here's a question on the radical responsibility. Is there an element here, because taking responsibility is important, I get that. But I also think in order to free yourself, to create your own future, and ultimately to live in the present, which we'll talk about as our last point, is there might be an element of forgiveness, forgiving yourself as a part of that. Because yeah, you have to believe 100% that you control your destiny. But at the same time, if you made a mistake, if you did something stupid, if you caused whatever to happen, you have to let it go a little bit too. Take responsibility, but also forgive yourself so that you can then move to the future in order to live in the present. What do you think about that?

It's so interesting you bring that up because the start of this was sort of talking through issues that I learned through reading the works of Carlos Castaneda, and actually more importantly, a gentleman named Victor Sanchez who basically wrote how to practically apply on a day-to-day basis the sort of concepts that come from that. But the second side of this sort of where I came up with the idea, because Carlos Castaneda talks about warrior all the time, right? So another gentleman who I have a whole lot of respect for and I've learned a lot from, not personally, but through reading, is Choiam Trungpa, who has, he's a, he's passed now, but he was an enlightened Tibetan Buddhist from Tibet. And he came up with sort of, he found that Americans, especially as he taught in the West, had a really hard time getting at the concepts that are sort of Tibetan Buddhism proper. They're very, it's kind of Catholic. It's got lots of saints and lots of ideas and lots of crazy things going on. They believe in not only reincarnation, but recapitulation, all these kind of rather strange concepts for the Western mind to sort of grasp. So he created another religion, which he called Shambhala, which is basically warrior training. And his very first principle, the initial most important principle that he has, one of which absolutely, utterly changed my life growing up in a strict fundamentalist Christian background where I felt like I was evil, terrible, no good, and I needed a savior to die on a cross for me to actually be worthy of being alive. His first statement is, his first step is, you are good. You must deal and accept the fact that you are already good. If you're already good, which is a huge, huge challenge for the Western mind to address, especially those in the West who have been and who hasn't really been at least rather surfacedly or in many of us, I know you are as I am, have been really, really sort of stamped by a religious worldview that states that you're flawed and you need saving. And Choam Trungpa says, basically, you must recognize your good. You must see your good because that's the only way you're going to get out. It's the only way to get out. So for those who are Christians and say, well, that just totally doesn't jibe with my worldview, you can say, but once you've been in that place, you're good, good, right? I mean, in essence, you're already good. You're made good by. So whether you want to go one way or another doesn't really matter, but now you must live as if, live in the space of being good. And to continue to wallow in this place consistently of I'm not, is again to play the victim. Well, if you're ______, there's no space for the victim. It is no time and space for the victim. For Christ, I took care of it, dude. Why are you still a victim? Move on. That's why I made this decision to move into this space. So basically, no matter where you're coming from, you're coming to the same place, which is radical responsibility, take full acceptance of the things that happen to you. You're good. Your choice allows you to continue to act that good out or to be in that space on a day-to-day basis.

Don't beat yourself up over it, basically.

Yes. It's absolutely the least effective mode of operating as a human is to be a victim. And anyone who has been in a trauma situation, and I am not an expert here, please, folks, don't get me wrong. I am not telling you that you utilize these methods instead of going and seeing someone if you've had trauma in your life, please. But they will eventually be telling you, you must accept, you must take your life back, and you must know it's good, and you must see you are not a victim, and you have to then be responsible for the things that happen to you, and then make choices, because your ultimate freedom in this world is to choose.

So let's get practical, because for me, as I reflect on this conversation, it brings back some memories of my old working environment, working in the business consulting world, and we worked a lot of hours. We traveled a lot. I often traveled four days a week, leaving Monday early, coming back Thursday evening. And there were a lot of people in that world that had bad family relationships, because they were never there. That's one thing I... One reason why I got out of that world, but when I was in that world, I would have conversations with people that would say, my relationship with my wife isn't as good as it could be, because I travel four days a week, and I'm getting home at 8.30 or 9.00 on a Thursday night. And so it's easy in that environment, or any environment where you're having pressure to be a certain way, to just be that way as well. But for me, I'm like, that's stupid. Why would I live that way? And yeah, it was a given for me that I was going to travel four days a week. But I started saying, look, no, I'm going to leave at three o'clock on Thursday so I can be home by six or seven, have dinner with my wife. And having dinner on Thursday with her made all the difference in terms of how the week felt, because it was like I was there Thursday versus coming back Friday or coming back too late on Thursday and being cranky from the flight. So I refused to be the victim in that context. And I think there's a lot of little examples like that. And of course, big ones as well, where people say it all the time. They say, well, I don't have time to run. I'm too busy at work. Or I'm too busy with this. There's a lot of people in Rogue that have crazy, crazy stuff going on, kids and jobs and insane commitments that are making it happen because they create space for it. So stop being a victim.

If you want the short version of this, it could be a shirt, a quote on the back of a shirt. You own it, even if you don't. You own it. Whether you think you're not, you still own it. It still is. Think about this. It happens at the 18-mile market at Marathon. It's painful. Usually people are in that position where they're making some critical choices at that moment. They are going to come up in that experience if they're already in a victim space, if they're already in a place where they're not going to take responsibility for it. They're going to find reasons not to achieve the thing that they want. Now, you can either look at it from the person. As I said, this concept of radical responsibility and the freedom to choose, they are the same coin, folks. They're just two different sides of it. So you can take radical responsibility. It doesn't help you. You still have to... It helps you see clearly. Believe me, if you live a life of radical responsibility, you'll see nearly too clearly, and your ability to be an empathetic human being can sometimes be challenging. When I think about it as myself as a coach, I would definitely do, as I say, not as I do coach, for sure, because I don't do that much running myself, but I did many, many years of it. But I have a tendency sometimes when I look at my athletes from this radical responsibility space that I tend to not sometimes have the kind of empathy that I need to. But then when I think to tell them that they chose that, that they chose to give in at that moment to the pain and suffering that was there, then not only does it help them, instead of seeing it as I sucked, I was terrible, I'm a victim, I didn't make that choice, they say I didn't choose that, and all they had to choose was to suffer for five minutes more or two minutes more or three minutes more, and it might have changed. We don't know, we don't know for sure. But in the practical applicability of a marathon, being in a place where you are already really responsible for your actions and for what happens to you and that you're willing to see your freedom to choose one way or another, some of these decisions that happen to people that get to be really tough decisions in a race become significantly easier, because these are harder to deal with in the context, like you said, about what choices you make with your job and what choices you make in terms of making the most of the circumstances that you're in. Because it's happening to you, how you choose to frame it, look at it, deal with it, is truly, truly a choice and a freedom and an opportunity. Because people, the folks that are in a, that get thrown into a jail, and who are in a position of maybe even being in a, whether they're in one room all by themselves, because their world does not allow freedom because of political unrest or decisions they made before, they know what it's like not to have freedom. We have so much freedom, but yet we don't concentrate on it so much, and we need to more, because it is our empowerment. It truly empowers you, and if you can see it from this perspective, I think you'll find that you're, not only will your life be significantly more volitional and you're able to control things a lot better, you'll be happier in your running world. Your running life will become much, much simpler.

People tell me all the time, because I coach a 5.30 a.m. group, I just can't wake up early.

Yeah, I hear that all the time.

And I'm not a morning person in the least, and I can do it, so anybody can do it.

And neither am I.

So stop making excuses is ultimately what we're saying. Another thing on this point, before we go to the last one, kind of this two-sided coin of you have to take radical responsibility and then choose to create your own future, because I do think there's an element of other people that have spoken so-called truth into your life that you might be holding onto that you got to let go of. Sally Burgesson from Wazel started this Twitter feed, hashtag this past weekend, maybe it was late last week. It was hashtag they said, and it was a lot about focused on the female form and shit basically that people say about women and their body types and whether they're too big, too small, whatever. And so she started this hashtag that has now gone crazy. So you should check it out. It's hashtag they said on Twitter of basically women, girls, men, also sharing a body shaming comments they've heard from other people that clearly they were carrying or have carried for a long time that shaped their own truth, their own ability to take radical responsibility over their own mindset and view of themselves. And so I think there's a piece here of also recognizing that, I know we're not talking about absolute truth, but you create your own truth. So you have to, as a part of this process of taking radical responsibilities, crowd out other people's truth and bullshit that they've spoken into your life that you might be holding onto that's holding you back.

I agree. I mean, I think that that's a practical, obvious empowerment process. You have to, again, passing through the dark, which is they said, and that impact it had on you, to the point where they said becomes an empowerment, that's beautiful.

So let's talk about the last step, which is admittedly the most amorphous for us, and we're going to admit that we don't have all the answers because it is, I think, something that many seek and many talk about. But once you've taken stock, identified your strengths and weaknesses, then accepted your radical responsibility and chosen to make your own future, the last bit is coming back and taking all of that and processing it and then somehow living in the present. Not living in the past. Obviously, you got to think about the past as a part of this process, but not living in the past, not getting too far ahead of yourself and be present. You also talk about it as sort of eternal present tense for your own life. How do we do that?

Well, first, I've said this many, many times, and I'm really looking forward to the first person to challenge me on it. And again, I'm not going to say that I'm absolutely correct, but it's something I've been saying repeatedly and over and over again, and yet, I haven't had somebody challenge me on it. I would love to find someone who is actually in the past. Or experiencing the past. Who is in the past. Or another is someone who is actually in the future. You know, we said, own your past, create your future. But owning your past is seeing it, recognizing it, to move into the present. Creating your future are the things that you're doing currently in this moment right now to have to be in a future place you want to be. You know, the new science is basically questioning this whole idea about time. Is time really linear? Or is it cyclical? There's a big challenge now in not just in sort of the quantum mechanics, physics, but even into really consciousness and how that all functions is that time is not a river as we've talked about it so many times, but it's time is a swirl in a sense. And so it keeps coming back and back and back. But basically, I haven't met anybody in the future, and I haven't met anybody in the past, and yet we spend most human beings, when you talk to them, are in the present thinking nearly exclusively about one or the other, especially if you're in a trauma situation, you're spending considerable, or in a broke heart situation, you're in a space that you're hyper-focusing on the past. And those entrepreneurs are current hackers out there, the life hack and everything else, they're spending an extended period of time in a future that I don't see, that I'm not really in, because I can only, at this point, that I've been able to tell in my 47 years on the earth, I can only say it from my perspective, I have never been in the past, and I have never been in the future. So why am I spending so much time thinking about either one of those two things? If you can think of this, those of you who have any of the English background or paid a little bit of attention to how tenses work, being in that eternal present tense, try for a little while to just always say where you are right now, and not necessarily, I saw her, which is past, or I will see her, which is future, but I'm seeing her. I see you. It's stay in that eternal present tense, in a sense. And empowerment, then you're controlling the thing that actually exists. Yes, owning your past in the present, creating your future in the present, still keeps us in the present. So that's how you actually live that out. Well, I don't have much of a way to help you there. I'm just a stumbling, bumbling human fool, too. I know for a fact I'm a fool. Over the years, I've gotten much more comfortable with it, and even now recognize it as sort of a role I play or a space I fill. But I don't have the answers here, folks. I do have some answers in terms of how many miles a week for an individual to run or what paces they should operate. But ultimately, in this endeavor, you have to figure that out. And I do know that in an asset that has been in my life, when I think about warriorship, spending time in my present means I'm effective, I'm much more effective at creating some kind of future that I want to create.

A couple thoughts. One is that I think if you go back to some of the tools we've talked about in this series, some of the mental tools around purpose, vision board, I do think the more you can set up visual cues in your life that remind you of your intention on a daily basis, the more likely you're to have success with this. If you have that vision board somewhere posted visually, if you have your goals somewhere posted visually, not that you're thinking about the future with them, but it sort of reminds you to reset that intention every day when you see those things. So that's one thing I tell people and point to. The other thing is going back to this idea of, in the context of a race, I often say you got to run the mile you're in, and that's really hard for people to do. In fact, I had a one-on-one conversation with an athlete who's racing this weekend, a marathon, and he asked me the question, what happens if I go too slow in this mile, what should I do in the next mile, or five miles later, and my answer kept coming back to run the mile you're in. You can't go back and change the past. And if you course correct, in the present, you're screwed, so you got to just focus on what you can do right now. And so that idea of focusing on what you can do now, and we've talked about it in this podcast also in the context of worry, focusing on what you can do now and really practicing that is important. We also talked before we got on the mics that meditation could be a potentially useful tool, using that as a daily tool. There's some apps that kind of help you do that. You had mentioned one that is kind of helping you through daily meditation set your intention.

Yeah, I've got to... If there were one life hack, which everybody knows it's hurt me, I hate the idea of life hacks. I stumbled upon through one of my favorite magic podcasts that I listen to all the time, because I got a little weird magic thing going on. And I don't mean sleight of hand. I mean the way human psychology looks at things. It recommended an app called Headspace. And Headspace is a really cool meditation application where a guy, basically it suggests 10 days of meditating for 10 minutes a day. And he walks you through it. He literally, you just put the headphones on or put it on whatever speaker device you have, but make sure you're in a quiet place where you've got some time. I only ask for 10 minutes. Doesn't matter really when or when you do it. He's got some suggestions on the way to manage that. And those who are actually long term and maybe much more advanced meditators, there's still a whole lot there for you. There's a free app. It's a free app. The first 10 hours, the first 10 days, I have now done the first 10 days, I think maybe like 40 days now. I keep going back to the start, gaining a much greater ability to be in the present. And I haven't been 10 straight days, 40 straight days. I've missed days. I haven't been on all the time. But I do think meditation is in an amazing way, and one of the most effective tools to this, being in terms of learning how to effectively and practically be in the eternal present tense. So I highly suggest that application for anybody out there. As I coach athletes in the process of asking them to take on this ongoing mental training protocol, one of the very first things I'm going to ask them to do is download this application and start listening to it. It's that impactful to me. And I think it sort of sets the framework for how receptive people will be to some of these more woo-woo concepts that we talked about and these sort of meta big picture things.

This also underscores the fact that this is a daily practice. It's something you have to reset and practice daily, and it's probably nothing or something that you'll never be perfect at. And I don't think any of us are ever perfectly present, because there's so many temptations to slide out of the present. But you just got to work on it daily, and if you keep working on it daily with the context that we talked about in those first three steps, you're good there.

Just like you do your running. I mean, nearly every person that's listening to this podcast right now is a daily runner. Whether you're a four-day, five-day, six-day or seven-day a week runner, it doesn't really matter. If you're listening to this podcast and listening to us spout off all this stuff and you're at this point now with us 25 episodes in with this being the culmination of this current 25th episode, and you're still listening, you're a daily doer of this habit. Adding this other habit will make you a significantly better runner, I can promise you. To the point where I'm actually now looking at and contemplating some pretty big beehags myself in my running, as I look at it and say, this experience of being quiet and listening to myself and finding out what I really want by shutting down the rest of the crazy world has made me realize I have unfinished business here and that I can sort of come to this sport back afresh. I don't have to accept it in the water, in the space I was. I can actually sort of accept my past and deal with it and look forward to creating a future. And really, truly, I absolutely can't recommend that application enough. I highly recommend it.

So point being, we're both still working on it too. Yes, we all will.

I think the Dalai Lama is still working on it too.

So there you go, that's our four steps for unlocking and owning your personal power to operating in that warrior mentality. Take stock, take radical responsibility, choose to create your future, and then do your best to live in the present every day. And that wraps episode 25.

Amazing.

Hopefully they survived the woo-woo. Thanks for putting up with us. Thanks for enjoying this. Hopefully you learned something along the way. As always, check us out at our website, roguerunning.com. Follow us on Twitter, Instagram, and Facebook, at Rogue Running. This is episode 25, and we're out. We'll talk to you next time.

See you, people.