Hey, everybody, welcome to episode 378 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung, coming to you from Austin, Texas, with all of your running training and coaching needs. And today we're going to talk about what it looks like to prime yourself for fall training. Fall training is kicking off. We've got 18 weeks to the Berlin Marathon, 21 weeks to Chicago, 22 weeks to Columbus Marathon, which is where we're taking a bunch of our athletes this year. So we're in that window where it's time to be getting into what we like to call the priming phase. Some people call it the base phase. So I'm going to run down the things you should be thinking about in this priming phase in order to make sure that you're teed up for a good season of racing fast or getting after whatever goal you want to get after. So that'll be my main topic for today. Before we get there, just a couple of notes. One, I wanted to make you aware of this new live Q&A that we've been doing on the Rogue Running Instagram every Friday at 2 p.m. Central. If you can jump on live with us, Coach James and I are there to ask your questions, whatever they might be. Jump on, you ask a question in your comment and we'll give you answers. So that's a way to get real time Q&A with me and Coach James, if that's of interest. Again, that's 2 p.m. Central on Fridays. We've been doing it every Friday the last several weeks, so come back next Friday. If that's of interest to you or if you ever have a question or if you just want to jump on and see what we say to other people's questions, then I'll also remind you that this is our window for kicking off all training. So if you're in Austin or Dallas areas, then we have in-person training for you that's already started. So go to our website, roguerunning.com and check it out. And if you're looking at virtual training, either virtual group training or virtual one-on-one training, depending on the level of touch you'd like with your coach, you can check that out on our website as well. All of that stuff is starting in the next couple of weeks as well. And if you have questions about any of it and aren't sure where to go, just email coaching at roguerunning.com and you'll have your questions answered that way. So there you go. This is the time, time to get started. You don't want to get behind the eight ball on training, so make sure you're getting things going right now. This is the window to get started for all of those fall races. So what does that look like? If you know our training philosophy, you know that we favor a periodized approach, which is consistent with what most people favor and was really brought, brought to the forefront by the father of modern distance coaching, who many consider to be Arthur Lidyard. And so we follow a periodized approach. Some people call it base training, going into aerobic strength training, going into race specific training, going into your taper. Those are the four phases of training. Again, some people call it priming, some people call it base, but that first phase really helps you lay the foundation for what's to come. This is in some ways the most important part of training because you can only train as high, you can only reach as high a peak as you build a base and foundation. And so the bigger the base of a pyramid, for example, the higher the point at the top can go. And if you have a small base, you're not going to get as far as you want. So you want to make sure you have a big base and then that you're well primed for the training to come. In this phase of training, we like to say that it's time to get fit enough to train. So you're fit enough to train, meaning you've established all of the neuromuscular and the musculoskeletal preparation you need to apply greater stimuli down the road, so that your body can sustain the work without getting hurt along the way. And if you don't do that priming, that base building, that foundation laying, then again, you can't get a higher peak, and also likely you'll get injured as you ramp up. This is why we favor longer cycles. And one of the things I want to talk about in this episode, which I'll get into as we go, because some people ask me, well, that's too long. 18 weeks or 20 weeks is too long of a cycle. If I do it that long, then I'm going to peak early. And this is a question I've actually gotten a couple times recently. And I want to remind you that, in my opinion, as a coach and as an athlete, we control our peak with our mind as much as we control our peak with the physical training that we're doing. And what does that mean? You control your peak by sending signals to your body as to when it's time to be sharp and ready. And early in training, you want to send signals that it shouldn't be, that you should be making conservative choices, erring on the conservative side, going slower, choosing fewer reps and speed work. You tell your body that, hey, it's safe, it's okay, we're not doing anything too intense yet. And by managing that intensity, then you push out that peak. And then when it's time to peak, when you get into that race-specific phase, and you start being more precise with your paces, stepping closer to that edge, adding reps or doing the max reps, perhaps from the workouts that are given, doing those biggest workouts, those biggest long runs, that's a signal to your body when you step closer to the edge, which is partially a conscious choice, that it's time to peak. And then you reach that peak, and then you taper, and you race. But if you're doing too much too soon, you will peak too early. So that's why, coupled with the message of my episode last week about patience, you have to stay patient. It's a long cycle, but we have to build the base, the foundation properly. And so I'm going to remind you what it looks like to do so in a good, solid priming phase. In this episode, we're going to talk about seven components of a good priming phase. Seven things you should be thinking about now to make sure you're chasing PRs in the full or the half in the fall. So here we go. Seven components to be thinking about. First of all, you want to be thinking about organizing your plan. You want to write out the blueprint for a successful training cycle for you between now and September, October, November, whenever that peak race is. So what are the components of a properly organized plan? You want to think about the phases of the work. How long is your priming phase? How long is your strength phase? How long is your race-specific phase? How long is your taper? How does that play out over the next 18 to 20 weeks? And if you want a primer on that, I can go to episode 229, and I talk all about periodization and how to break that down and how long each phase might be in the process. So think about that phasing, how that plays out. You want to think about the peak volume you're trying to achieve and how that might map out over that phase. So you're essentially putting together that day-by-day plan, but by figuring out the parameters for what that day-by-day plan looks like. How does your peak volume progress from this season to the last? Are you going to keep it the same? Are you going to perhaps bump it up? I always recommend bumping up that peak volume by no more than 20% from one peak to in one cycle to the next peak in the next cycle. But for most people, you might benefit from taking even smaller steps than that. So what does that peak volume look like and how do you map to get there? Ideally, you come in to a training with some foundational running so that you can get to that peak as soon as possible from a volume standpoint, ideally by the end of that aerobic strength phase so that you're already at peak volume when you get into your most intense work in that race-specific phase. So what does that look like? Relatedly then, how do those miles fit together? How are you going to build that peak week in a sense? What are the, what's the max medium long run look like? What's the max long run look like? What do your recovery days look like? What is your quality look like in terms of peak volume? And then, of course, how do you get there by mapping out that day-by-day plan, trying not to bump by more than, I say, three to five miles per week, or some people say 10% from week to week. So you can map out that day-by-day plan, build gradually, and have it all structured and organized. And then, of course, you got to pick your race. You got to choose or define the major logistics around that for travel. Get a flight, get a hotel, get anything you need to get done early. So all that stuff is taken care of. But you got to organize. Organize and structure your plan. I do not recommend just winging it. And, of course, as we know, great boxer Mike Tyson says, everybody has a plan until you get punched in the mouth. This does not mean you're creating something that you'll necessarily be able to follow day by day because you're always going to need to make modifications. As I like to say, there's no perfect plan. You don't execute perfectly. It's just you're going to have something that goes wrong. You get sick, you get a little injury, you have to adjust for a work thing, whatever it may be. You're going to have to make adjustments. And that's okay. But if you have the basis of the plan, then you have a foundation upon which you can adjust versus if you're just winging it, most of the time you don't get all of the work done that you'd like to get done. So create that plan, even recognizing that it will change because you'll have it in pencil and you can make those adjustments as needed. Then once you have the overarching plan, obviously you can click into the details a little bit and map out what it's going to look like for your big long run workouts, for example. And then ultimately all of those midweek workouts as well. So then you have it all structured, and again, that's not to say it won't change at some point, but you at least have that starting point, that base from which you can adjust the plan as things go. In all of this, thinking about the priming phase, I kind of, the analogy I'll use is it's kind of like preparing for a long road trip. You know, let's say you have to drive 12 hours from one place to the next for a road trip. That's kind of similar to a long training cycle. And you got to start by planning it, figure out, figure out where you're going to go, where your big stops are going to be for meals, what you need to take, is the car ready, all that kind of stuff. Make sure you've got it all mapped out before you get started so that you can have a framework for that trip that of course then will change as you go. So that is one. You got to organize your plan and now is the time to do it. Don't just wing it as you go. Put pen or pencil to paper and have it all mapped out so that you can make adjustments along the way. So that's number one. Organize your plan. Create the blueprint. Number two, figure out your routine. I talked about this in my intro a couple weeks ago. You want to make sure you've established what's what. Where does everything fit? How do your days fit together so that you know exactly when your medium long run is, your long run is, your quality day, your speed day, your recovery runs are, and how does that fit together with your strength training as well? What's the blueprint for that? So figure out that day by day routine and start getting in that mode. And it's not necessarily important that all your days look the same, but I like to say you want your Mondays to look like your Mondays, your Tuesdays like your Tuesdays, so that your weeks look like each other from one day to the next. So Mondays should look like Monday, Tuesday like Tuesday, and if those need to flex from each other, that's okay, as long as it's consistent from week to week. And obviously, again, there will be changes along the way, but you want that to be well established, because when you find a groove from a training perspective, from a routine perspective, then it makes all the training that much easier. And I'll remind you that once you get into this official training, you want to make sure that you've got your routines established around recovery as well. And in the summer, I always put an asterisk around that hydration routine as well. You should be doing a couple, at least a couple of servings of electrolytes throughout every single day, not just when you're running, but throughout every single day. I like to do morning and afternoon in the summer, so that I'm getting electrolytes so I can absorb the water I'm taking in, and then of course plenty of water around that. Have an actual routine around it so that it's built into your day, whatever that looks like, whether you're using Scratch or Element or Noon or any of those hydration products that are great. Have it built in. If you're at work, make sure you have a routine around getting those powders and waters mixed at the right time to get a couple of servings throughout the day. If you're at home, working from home, make sure that's built in. It's as important as getting your meals in, getting those electrolytes supplementation throughout the summer months. So build that into your routine. Start doing it. Set the precedent so that you can then repeat it from week to week. And same goes for all your strict training, all your runs, your wake up times, your bedtimes. And again, it doesn't have to be perfect. But when you're in rigorous training mode, you want to make sure that you can replicate weeks from one to the next. That is a recipe for consistency. If you can't be consistent, then it's going to be really hard to stick with the routine. So embed those practices now. Don't beat yourself up if you miss, or if you're still, if it takes a few weeks to get into that groove, but trend towards that consistent routine over the next several weeks. It is absolutely important and critical to nailing this priming and base phase. So that's number two. Routine. Base volume is number three. The priming phase is about establishing base volume, building that volume from whatever your starting point. Hopefully, you have a foundation coming in, and now you can just build upon that. But if not, then you want to get those runs established, build days first, then start adding distance. Don't add by more than three to five miles per week from week to week. But this is important. Really, really important. The more mileage you can build safely and injury-free in the base and priming phase, the faster you're going to be in the end. I think there's a mentality that miles now don't matter as much as miles later, because, oh, it's so far away. My race isn't for 20 weeks or five months or whatever it may be. And so you minimize the work now because you have so much time. But from my perspective, the miles now are perhaps even more important than the miles later, because what you can do now in building your foundation sets the ceiling, essentially, for what you'll be able to accomplish later. Do you want a really low ceiling? Do you want a low ceiling? Because that's what you're giving yourself if you don't get good foundational volume. Obviously, you got to build it safely. But just recognize that these runs now, doing them consistently, building gradually over the next four to six weeks, is as important as the volume later, because this sets how fast and easily and quickly you can get to a peak. It sets the aerobic foundation, which will determine at least partially your ability to sustain race pace for longer and longer periods of time later. But it matters. If you skip runs now, it will cost you later in ways that you won't necessarily be able to connect the dots. But this is absolutely critical. You got to build that pace volume. Add days to the routine first, then start adding distance. Do it gradually. But yes, make no mistake, these runs matter so much more than you think. Get that big base established by getting in those easy runs and that volume now. So that's number three. Number four, get your supplies. Get your supplies. If you think about a good road trip, you always have to have supplies. You want snacks, you might want games you can play on the road, you want a cooler with drinks, so you can stay hydrated while you're driving. And there's really no difference here with establishing this early foundation for your running, which is to make sure you have all those supplies. Make sure you're stocking up on the nutrition that you're going to need for your long runs, that you have plenty of the hydration powder of choice or electrolyte powder of choice, that is important to use so that you don't go into gaps where it runs out. Make sure you have the shoes that you need. Do you get a good fresh pair to start training and have a loosely determined plan for when you'll need to replace those shoes. And if you need to try on a new pair of shoes or get something new, go to the running store, your local running store and figure out what's right for you. Do all of that stuff now by maybe a fresh running outfit. That'll be fun and motivating for you to get out in, get all the lubricating products that you need, the sports shield, the body glide, the tape, all that stuff. You're going to buckle down for a summer of training. And so it's important to make sure you have all the tools that you need in your toolkit so you don't end up in a situation where you have to scramble. So get those supplies now. You want to be equipped and ready to do the work ahead. So that's number four. Number five, you want to start to build in some basic priming speed workouts. And it's important to know what we want from the speed workouts in the priming phase. We want these to be mostly about neuromuscular and musculoskeletal stimulation. We're not necessarily trying to get specific aerobic outcomes or anaerobic outcomes, certainly in this phase of work. What we're trying to do is prime the system for the work ahead by doing some speed work that essentially tease you up to safely do more aggressive speed work later. I like to call it speed development work. That's the phrasing I use, which means usually doing workouts where you're getting plenty of recovery, likely doing small shorter intervals with plenty of recovery, perhaps hitting some faster paces, but doing it in a controlled way and with dosages that are really small so that you don't push yourself to injury. If you haven't been doing any speed workouts, then that should start out by just doing strides after one run per week. That's where I would start. Strides are short controlled sprints. To give you a quick refresher on those, you want to find an 80 to 100 meter stretch of road or track, and then think about it in thirds. You build your speed for a third, you hold your speed for a third, and you let off the gas and cruise for the final third of that stride. You walk back to the start for full recovery, get that heart rate all the way back down, and then you go again. In that middle third, you're going to reach maybe 85 to 90, max 95% of peak speed, but always in control. So you're picking it up, you're working on form, you're flying and having fun with it in a way that's not too taxing physically. These are not wind sprints from your high school sport. These are controlled sprints with full recovery in between with that full walk back recovery. You want to start there. If you haven't been doing any speed, start adding strides for a couple of weeks. I like to stick with four to six of them, maybe four or five on your first session, maybe five or six on your second session to introduce some faster work to your body. And then you gradually start amping things up from there. And again, this will, the types of workouts you do will depend on how much you've been doing before the cycle. But you start with strides, maybe flat, maybe after a couple of weeks, you can do some strides with a slight incline. I often like to do time to hill reps during this phase, maybe 30 second intervals up, easy back down, which allows you to time it, see your progress up the hill, maybe progress into it so you get a little higher up to the hill as you progress through some reps, but with a gentle incline to give yourself some of that power and muscular activation, building activity. And then you can build into some pickup style workouts where you might do one minute pickups or two minute pickups with free form paces based on how you feel with plenty of recovery, easy jogging in between. And then you might get into some more slightly more advanced workouts. I love a 3-2-1 fart lick in this phase of work, three minutes on at maybe about marathon effort with three easy, then two minutes at half effort, two easy, one minute faster, one easy. And then you repeat that again for a second time. That's when you start mixing in some different paces and progressing through a little bit of a workout, but without putting a lot of specifics on paces or without being too aggressive either. You always want all of these workouts in the priming phase to be very much by feel. When in doubt, take more recovery than you think you need. And if you are going a little bit faster, make sure that you stay in control. You never want to be out of control or in a situation where the body is super fatigued or the form breaks down because then you're defeating the purpose of the work. So it should always be in control, always be manageable, mostly with plenty of recovery, perhaps touching on some faster paces or some variable paces, but never in a way that stresses the body too much or is really ever too precise. That's the type of stuff we should be doing in the priming phase and it should all be very manageable, very bite sized. You should never finish any of these workouts feeling like you buried yourself. So when in doubt, always, always, always choose easier or less than more in this phase of the work. But that's the general flavor of what you want to be doing in the priming phase is adding some gentle speed in a way that primes the system for more. That gets you fit enough to train so that when we start doing more specific workouts, then your body is ready. So that's number five. Number six, we'll talk about paces because that's important to again, as I just mentioned, from a workout standpoint, I don't really want you worrying about paces at all. If you're not sure about what paces you will use later in training, then maybe after three or four weeks, you could always do a time trial like a two mile time trial in the priming phase. If you're not sure about your paces, you can do that eight laps as fast as you can on a track to give you a good sense for where you are from a pace standpoint so that when you do get to more specific work, then you know how to calculate those paces via the time trial and using one of those pace calculators that you can find online. But if you've already done a race recently, or if you have a recent race result, then you can use that information as well. But again, don't want to worry about paces and workouts at this stage, but you do want to be thinking about what those paces will be when you get to that next aerobic strength phase. And so a time trial can help with that or recent race, or maybe you could jump into a 5K and see what you have as a bit of a fitness check and test early in this work. But more than all of that, I want to talk particularly about easy run paces in this phase of work. Easy run paces in this phase of work. It is so, so important, and I cannot stress this enough, that you take your easy running, your long runs, your recovery runs, your other easy days, your medium long run, as easy as possible in this phase of work. You are adding volume to the system, and you want to make that progression as easy as possible on the body. So when you're adding volume, you want to make it as easy as possible on the body, and the way to do that is by modulating your easy runs accordingly. Additionally, of course, because it's hot and it's a summer, and you're going to be dealing with all of that stress and adaptation, you need to perhaps slow down even more because of that. So you should be slowing way down right now. I talked about it last week on patience. You got to go slow to go fast. And it is absolutely even more critical in this phase of the work that you slow down. And I might be a broken record saying this, but you have to do it. We build aerobic capacity in a broad range, in a really broad range. So you might as well operate on the safer end of that range, on the easier end of that range. And so what should runs look like now? I can give you specific pace guidance, but more than that, I want you to think about effort. I want you to think about effort. If you're out on easy runs, then here are some ways to gauge whether you're doing it right. One is, how do you feel at the end? If you're out on an early long run while you're building your long run volume in the priming phase, and you get done and you feel wrecked or super fatigued, or you got to go home and take a nap, and you're just destroyed for the rest of the day, not that you shouldn't take a nap, by the way, if you want to, because that's great for recovery. But if you just feel like you can't stay awake, you're wrecked, you can't move around the rest of the day, then that's a sign you're going too fast. What's another sign? Another sign is, how does it feel in the moment? Are you able to have a conversation when you run with a friend that might be with you, where you can not just speak in full sentences, but you can comfortably speak in full sentences? If you can't do that, then you need to slow down. If you can't comfortably speak in full sentences, then you need to slow down. That's absolutely critical. You should also see modulation between your long run effort and your recovery run effort. Your recovery runs should be even slower. I want you to challenge yourself to go even slower in this phase of work on your recovery runs. Think about what you normally do your recovery runs in, and then maybe set a target to go a minute per mile slower in this phase on those recovery runs. Because if you can do that, then your body will more safely adapt to the load as you build into this training. So your recovery runs down even more. And if you need a rule of thumb, because of the summer months that are coming, usually I say one minute slower than marathon pace for your long runs and your medium long runs, or 90 seconds slower than your half pace. But I would add at least 30 seconds to that for this phase of work and for the heat that is coming. So give me 90 seconds slower than your target marathon pace for your easy days, and two and a half minutes slower at least than your target marathon pace for your recovery days. Or two minutes slower than your half marathon pace for your long run and medium long run days, and three minutes slower than your half marathon pace on recovery days. Yes, that much slower. If you're not doing that, then you're doing it wrong. Full stop. Embrace it. You will be surprised at not only how you get, how good you feel in this base phase, but also what you can unlock in yourself when the real work gets started if you embrace this mentality of keeping it super easy. So slow down even more. It's absolutely critical, especially in this phase of work. That's number six. Number seven is just a reminder about the mentality that you should have in this phase. As I said earlier in the podcast, peaking is as much mental as it is defined by the work that you're doing. You need to be thinking in this phase of work that you want to make conservative choices. You want to signal to your body that it is safe and that it is nowhere near that flight or fight mode that needs to get activated with an impending race. How do we tell our body that it's safe and that it can just comfortably cruise and not have to worry about getting ready, getting peaked for something big? How do we tell ourselves that? Our body that? How do we send signals? Well, we do it by how we think about the training, meaning making conservative choices at every possible turn, going a little slower than you think, choosing to go do fewer reps than you think, maybe modulating the workout to be easier if you're not sure you're ready for something, taking a little more recovery if needed in a workout, if you somehow find your heart rate accelerating too much, or if you're in your volume build that you had planned and the body's a little flat and you're not sure if you should take that next step up in volume because you just don't feel like you're consolidating that work well enough. Maybe stay at that volume you're already at for a week and then build the next week. Listen to your body along the way and make those conservative choices because that's a signal that it shouldn't be anywhere near a peak, that it's safe. It'll also allow you to build in a healthy way that's going to unlock so much more potential down the road. So this is not the time to go all Dave and Goggins on your training. I mean, I don't really generally ever recommend going all Dave and Goggins, but especially not in the priming phase, in the base building phase. Our body should feel so safe, we should keep it as far away from the edge as possible by making those conservative choices. Yes, do the work and yes, build volume. And by the way, you'll be able to build more volume eventually than you think if you take those paces super easy because your body will be able to sustain the loads. But it's so, so critical that you have that mentality now because if you don't, if you try to press, if you step close to the edge, if you do too much, if you're not sure and you take that next rep or add that extra volume, then that's a signal to your body that should be under stress and that, or it should be getting ready for something big and important. And so that pushes you towards a peak and then you might end up peaking too soon. So your mentality and your approach during this phase is absolutely critical to giving you that longevity to patiently build to the highest peak possible in September or October or November. So get your priming phase in now and do it in the right ways. So again, here are those seven things, just as a reminder, one, organize your plan, figure out how it all fits together over the next four or five months, two, set and establish that routine now, three, build the vase volume, which is so critical to making sure you can reach the highest peak possible, four, get all those supplies so you're ready and you don't, you don't lack for anything at any stage in the journey. Five, start to introduce those speed development workouts, beginning with strides, and then starting to get a little more complicated over time. Six, think about what your patients should be, and especially go super easy on those long runs and those recovery runs. And number seven, embrace that long-term patient mentality, make the conservative choices so that you can save your peak for when it matters in that race specific phase well down the road. So there you go. Seven thoughts for thinking about your priming phase, which should be for most of you are racing in the fall starting now. Hope that helps. As always, thanks for listening. Hope you join us on a Friday Q&A at 2 p.m. Central on the Rogue Running Instagram. Otherwise, you can check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Facebook or Instagram at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.