Hey, everybody, welcome to episode 307 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung, coming to you from Austin, Texas. And I'm excited to intro today a conversation that I just had with fellow podcast host and former elite athlete Tina Muir. Tina is now a friend of mine. She's the host of the podcast Running for Real, as well as Running Realized. She also has a book coming out later this year called Becoming a Sustainable Runner. So, stay tuned for that info coming out. I'm actually going to have her on to talk about that when it's released as well. Today, though, we're going to be talking about a resource that she just released, a series of YouTube videos discussing RED-S, relative energy deficiency in sport, which is something that can happen to anyone when you're under-fueled. Your body can begin to shut down some of its key functions, which can cause health-related issues, as well as potentially performance-related issues. We're going to be talking about what are the symptoms of RED-S, how do you get diagnosed, what are the myths associated with this topic, and of course, how do you actually go about recovering from it. Now, I think this is a key interview and topic for anybody that might be participating in the sport of running. You might be facing these symptoms now. You might know someone who might be facing these symptoms and need to know how to support them or what resources to provide them. Or there may be a time someday when you are facing this challenge personally. So please, I encourage everyone to take a listen to this episode. So without further intro, we're going to jump right into my conversation with Tina. Here we go. Welcome, Tina Muir, to the show. Tina, so good to have you on again.

I know, I'm excited. Do you know, it's funny, the last time I was on the show, I think that was the first time we ever spoke. And you at that time, and I don't mean this in a negative way at all, but you were like just another podcaster at the time. And now you're a friend and I know you and I care about you. And so it feels weird now doing this, knowing that last time you were like a face in a crowd. Now I know and love you.

Yeah, that was way back, episode 82 and so a long time ago, July 2018. And yeah, I mean, the fraternity and sorority of running podcasters is fairly small. But I would say, I don't know that actually that many really closely. And you're one of them. We've gotten to meet several times in Austin when you've been here. I think we've hung out in Boston as well, if I'm not mistaken. But either way, it's good to actually have our friendship extend beyond just knowing each other through the airwaves.

Although you just pointed something out, which is that I always come to you. So you need to come to me.

I do need to come to St. Louis. Yes. And we've talked about that because my brother lives in St. Louis. I don't really have any good excuses not to come see you, hang out with my brother and all of that. But yes, it has been good to get to know you. One of the things I appreciate about you is your authenticity, not just as a friend, but also as a content creator. So thanks for that.

I appreciate that. I mean, I don't think many other people would begin an episode with you were just a face in the crowd.

Keeping it real as your podcast implies, running for real. So yes, well, I'm glad I'm more than a face in the crowd.

I was just in a media swell then, okay?

Forget it. No offense taken. All right. So we're here today to talk about an important topic, one that I think is just really starting to get the airtime that it deserves in conversation like these. We're going to be talking about RED-S, Relative Energy Deficiency in Sport. You put together a great YouTube video resource with, I don't know how many videos there are, but a lot of three to five minute videos answering questions about this topic. Really good resource. And I wanted to open with that because I don't want to get lost in the aftermath of the conversation and say, hey, where can I learn more? I want people to know that we're talking about this because of this resource you've created and because it's so important to get the message out about this topic. And we'll get to obviously all of what it is. But I do want to just first start by asking, why did you create this resource?

You know, it's interesting. I have, even since I've created it, I thought I was creating it for one reason, but now reflecting on it, I think I created it for more than one reason and a few reasons that I didn't even consider. And you and I were talking before about how much people put in into a book when they write a memoir, how much of themselves they put into something. And I think in some ways, this ended up being a bit of that for me, because the reason I was driven to make this in the first place was, you know, I mentioned just now about kind of being in a media swirl. And one of the things I was, or probably still am known for in the running space is essentially the girl who got her period back, because I went nine years as a professional athlete, well, collegiate athlete and professional athlete without having a period. And I was the first elite athlete of any kind to really speak out about that. And so I spoke out about it, it went wild in the media, and that was one thing. But I think because at the time when I recovered, I stopped running entirely, just quit randomly one day, which I think we would have talked about last time. But then I got pregnant almost immediately, so my life shifted. Suddenly, I was preparing to be a mother, and I don't think I ever truly processed what I went through in those nine years. And so this resource is basically what I wish I had for those nine years, for during that time, I felt broken, I felt alone, I felt like my body was just the only one that was like out to get me. I like heated my body for that. I was so, I mean, I've learned the difference between envious and jealous, and most people get them the wrong way around, but I was deeply jealous of people who had their, elite athletes who had their period of function correctly, because I was like, what is wrong with mine? And so I made this resource because I felt that way for nine years, and I just wish I had something or someone to talk to about it, and that's what I wanted to make for other people who are potentially feeling that way. But yeah, as I mentioned, it ended up being a bit of a healing process of me realising just how traumatic that process was, and only really healing myself and giving myself the grace while going through and making it. So I think it should be part of a healing and recovery journey for anyone really who has potentially a disordered relationship with food.

And you said that there were other things that bubbled up, other reasons that bubbled up. Was that your original core reason was to do it as a part of your healing journey or is that what you realise is a part of it?

That's what I realised is a part of it. My original reason was I wanted to create something for what I wish I had. But yeah, I think in my head, I was in my past. I'm way past that. That was when I was young and immature because it was coming up on seven years ago. But I think going through this, I realised I had not processed any of the way I was feeling throughout that time. I had just moved on, essentially, almost drawn a line in the sand and stepped past it. But as we know with traumatic things, you can draw a line in the sand, you can push it out, but it's still there. So yeah, that is exactly what bubbled up, was just like, wow, I never processed this.

What were some of the feelings that came out?

Well, as you know, being my friend, a few weeks ago, I was in a really, or probably a month ago, I was in a bad spot, just mentally, emotionally, I think it drained me. Going through all of the, having these experts, which is, you mentioned the videos are three to five minutes. I basically collected up, I've had tens of thousands of emails and messages and direct messages and all kinds of things from people at this point. I basically combed through and organized the most common ones of questions, literally word for word, the people had said me. So for one example is, my weight is normal. Surely it can't be RED-S or the other versions would be that my weight is normal, surely I can't have a menorrhea. My weight is normal, surely that can't be why my period is not there. And so for processing, it was all those years, I was convinced I was the quote unquote bigger one. And it wasn't about my weight, it wasn't about food. I just was unlucky with my body. And so I think realizing that all those years, I had been kind of, I guess, lying to myself and convincing myself that that wasn't the case. But hearing the experts say it to me, because it was to me, even though we were doing it for other people, was actually like them giving me a therapy appointment for that little girl, that inner child inside, or that mid-20s girl inside that was trying to pretend that it wasn't my weight or my food or my relationship to the way that I looked.

Is there also a bit of feeling like there's something wrong with you and processing of that? I've had some conversations with athletes about this, and one of the things that seems to come up is this feeling that there's something wrong with me, that this means I've done something wrong or I'm a bad person or not good at managing my own body when this is something and we'll get into what it is, but this is something that can happen to anyone and it doesn't define you, it doesn't mean something's wrong with you.

Yeah, absolutely. There was many, many ways that that took effect. I mean, I think most people who find themselves in this situation, there's some version of not good enough, wanting to always be whatever level of success you get, whatever performance you get, it's always like, okay, done that, right. Next, I need to do this. So there's an element of that. But then I also find that it was me being very aware when I was around other runners of how much they were eating and thinking, well, I'm eating more than they are. So why are they getting their period and I'm not? Like, why is my body being so like dumb, even though actually my body was being very smart, because it was giving me the indicator that something was off. But I would see it as like a personal of like, yeah, my body is the dumb one that gets panicked, even though that person next to me, which obviously is an issue of an in itself, the comparison. But yeah, it felt like other people around me, I was like, you should be the one who doesn't have your period, not me, even though this is one meal out of the whole day, you don't know what the rest of their day looks like. So yeah, many different ways that came up.

Okay, so let's get to it. What is RED-S? Let's find that before we get too far into the competition.

So you said it's relative energy deficiency in sport, which that phrasing makes it sound like it is skinny elite runners who deal with this, but actually RED-S affects anyone regardless of size, weight, miles run per week, speed, pace, performance, any of those factors, and gender too. RED-S affects all genders equally. And it basically means what it sounds like it does, which is that you're not taking in enough fuel for your body to function with all the physical activity or life activities that you are completing. So with runners, that's typically, we're just not fueling enough for the amount that we're running plus the life stuff. And it means that your body is kind of starting to shut down some of the systems it feels are less important to make sure that the most important systems continue to work. So the systems it may begin to shut down are yes, the reproductive system. So in women, that's going to be, you know, I can't say that word, losing, how do you say it?

Secession?

Secession? I feel like this is that word now that I've tried it too much now, it sounds weird. I'm going to say losing your cycle, menstruation stops. For males, that might be testosterone, it's really low. It is also going to mean your extremities, your fingers and toes get really cold. You might, as I did say, I've got Raynards, that's why my fingers and toes were always cold. And my family has a history of Raynards, but now my body is healthy, I don't have cold fingers and toes all the time, so I know it was that. And so it will start shutting off other areas of your body to basically protect and preserve the key ones, which are in the core of our body. And yeah, it just means not having enough fuel for all that we are asking, regardless of how much we are actually doing.

So you mentioned reproductive health is something that's a struggle, body temperature regulation. What are some of the other symptoms somebody might see with RED-S?

This is not a symptom, but it generally is tied to someone who is quite type A, quite self-driven, may struggle with insomnia. That was actually the piece of this that broke me in the end was the insomnia. I could run a 24 mile run and then not be able to sleep that night. So that is another key point. Digestive issues is another one. And again, your body is shutting down, saying this is less important, just like it does in a run. And people tend to have digestive issues a lot of the time. A low libido is another one. And just, yeah, feelings of anxiety or kind of being on edge because your brain is not getting enough fuel and it is just in a state of kind of panic because it's trying to figure out where am I gonna get my next food supply from? Because it doesn't realize that we're surrounded by food, we're just not choosing to have it. So yeah, those are some of the big ones.

Basically, your body goes into a flight or fight mode. It's kicking in your survival instincts and it's not getting the fuel. It doesn't know why. It thinks that resources are limited, so it's starting to shut down functions in order to survive and in order to maintain the core of life. Did you also experience performance-related challenges? Did it affect your running?

Yeah, absolutely did, but that is obviously a hard one to put your finger on. I continued to improve throughout my running career till the very end when I quit. But, so I will never know, but I can confidently say I would have run better had I been correctly fuelled. I know that for sure. But I will say, I was pretty good at making sure in the time before a run, I was very fuelled up. Like I wasn't someone who had half a few bites of oatmeal and then tried to do a long run. Like I was very good at making sure I got my fuelling. It was just more so the after that I wasn't as good at. So there would have been muscle repair that didn't happen because of it, which would have affected my performance. So slower recovery. I did towards the end of my running career, try the kind of high fat, high protein, low ish carbs. I definitely think it would be considered low carb for a runner, but maybe not for a regular person who doesn't run. And that was great for a while, but then it hit me hard and I suddenly felt exhausted. And I think that was just more of an extreme version of RED-S, because now I was cutting out carbs, which or reducing carbs, which makes it difficult in any way you look at it to get enough calories.

Yeah, the macronutrient balance wasn't there. One of the tricky parts about performance with RED-S is that oftentimes, as you said, you might think you're doing well enough, or oftentimes people see improvement, dramatic improvement perhaps, even before they start to become more affected by the symptoms or before performance is affected. So to speak to that in terms of how it can play out that way.

Yeah, and I think that's where I maybe was on the end of things where my, I will say my family definitely has like a, if there's such a thing, like a survivor gene, like my mum's side of the family are like just indestructible. And so I do think I have a piece of that in that my body was able to handle maybe more than, I didn't get many injuries, which is very rare for someone who has RED-S, definitely didn't get bone injuries. And that's another symptom I suppose, if we want to call it that is injuries, particularly for moral, sacral, and any kind of hip stress fractures. Those are bright red flags that RED-S is either present or like on the edge of it. So yeah, a lot of people will end up improving, as you said, quite drastically, and then hitting a point where they get, yeah, a femoral stress fracture, and then they're returning to running and they get a pelvic stress fracture. Or just lots of little, you know, Achilles tendon and then patella issues, or that's not called tendon, it's tendinopathy, isn't it? And then they might have like a knee issue, all kinds of little things that keep appearing. Also same with getting sick easily, over training easily, all of those things, your body just becomes more susceptible to breakdowns. And so someone might say, oh, I'm just having a period of bad luck, or, oh, I just need to get through this patch, but it's actually your body is saying like, look, I've tried to function on this, but I can't do it. And that's where we really need to get to a point of saying, okay, something is off here. And I want to add at this point that when people recognize this, they sometimes panic and think, I don't want to gain weight. Like we're very much told that skinnier equals faster, that you need to look a certain way to run fast. And often it's not actually that much different to what you currently are at, but it just is, sometimes it can even be a deficit of like 300 calories a day, which is a solid granola bar or some kind of, yeah, some kind of bar.

A bowl of oatmeal.

A bowl of oatmeal, yeah, exactly. So it's not like a ton, but I think that's the hardest thing for people to reconcile is that we are told that you need to look like this. And even though it sounds simple of like just making a few tweaks, the mental side of it can almost be harder to untangle yourself from.

I think it's also important to note that oftentimes this can happen very inadvertently. You're trying to do the right things. I mean, I've heard of people tracking calories in order to try to get enough, and yet they still fell short not realizing the full amount that they needed. When you were going through this, did you even have the language to use? Because RED-S is a relatively new terminology around this. So we've also heard, or in the past, people have talked about the female athlete triad. That's another way this has been spoken about, but it's pretty new, this terminology and awareness of how all these factors contribute. So how did you navigate that? And what language was used at the time? And how did you sort through this on your own?

I think there wasn't any language. And that's again, primarily why I made this, was because I, well, it is coming around now. It's still something that is new. And it is again, talked in the context of elite athletes running 90 miles a week, which I was, but it also affects the, yeah, I've had, as I said, tens of thousands of people reach out from every area of the running world. So it's not just affecting elite athletes. And so I think we need to bring it into more of a general conversation. But yeah, I didn't have any language. I mean, I would go to doctor after doctor and they would say, well, just stop running. And I'd say, well, that's not something I can do. Like first time I'm on scholarship over here in the US. And then it was like, I'm a professional athlete, that's my job. And they'd say, okay, well, whenever you're ready, that's what you have to do. And that was like end of conversation. So there wasn't any language, female athlete triad, that conversation was happening. But again, with that, that obviously doesn't encompass so many people we know now that RED-S does. But it also was one of the triad pieces was injuries. And I wasn't getting injured. So I felt like that didn't apply to me because I wasn't getting injured. But I didn't have any kind of language. It was literally, I remember there was this group on Facebook that was 50 or so elite athletes having a conversation about birth control. And a lot of the big names we see now doing really well were in that group, although in their early days when they were very much in with everyone else. And that was the only thing I ever had that was putting any language to it. But even that was me sheepishly having watched this conversation about birth control, being like, so if someone say where to not have a period, because I wasn't even comfortable saying it. And immediately people jumped in and said, that's your calories. And I don't mind saying Kim Smith was one of the people that said, that's your calories. And I was like, no, that's not true with me. That's not the case. Because I didn't have the language, I didn't understand what it meant. And at the time, not having a period was absolutely associated with having an eating disorder. And there is a definite stigma around that. And unfortunately, that held me back and it still holds people back because that is not that there is anything wrong with having an eating disorder. It's not the person is an eating disorder, it is that they have one. But yeah, that was all I really knew of it. And that's exactly why I wanted to make this.

Which that is that topic is tied up into some of the mythology about RED-S. You can have an eating disorder and get RED-S. You can also have disordered eating and get RED-S. You could also not have either of those things and get RED-S. So there's a lot of different ways to get there. So let's talk a little bit about some of the mythology around this topic. You've mentioned some things already about any gender can get RED-S. You can have a perception that you're eating enough. This can happen to any body shape or form. So what are some of those other myths that people might carry with this?

Yeah, I think one of the biggest one, and this is the video that I think people seem to be relating to the most is as runners, we eat a lot. And we are around people in our lives, family, friends who don't run. And so to them, we look like we are absolutely eating all the time, eating mountains of food, because they are eating, they aren't just not burning the calories that we are. And so I think in our heads, because we see what other people are eating, we think, I am eating so much food. So it cannot possibly be that. But we forget that because of the running, that does require so many more calories, especially if you're doing something like marathon training, where you're running for hours on end and sometimes hard. It can be hard to get it in. And you hear these runners, like when Mike Wardian ran across the US, I ran two days with him, and he was saying that was one of the hardest things, was getting enough calories in, because you get to a point where you're fed up of eating. And so I think that's one of the biggest myths, is I eat a lot, so it can't be that. I think, yeah, another myth is, as you said, the gender is a big one. It's like, this is a women's thing, which it absolutely is not. Trying to think of what other ones there would be. The skinny elite woman is another big one.

The idea that you don't have to be elite is another important one. This can happen to the everyday athlete who's training for a marathon, who's just trying to improve their personal best, or maybe even finish their first marathon. It's something that can happen to all level of a runner.

And even just in terms of life. So let's say you are a runner, but you're also moving house or getting a divorce or in early stages of having a baby, especially if you're breastfeeding. It can also affect people because it is just about a deficiency in calories. It doesn't have to be when you are at your max training. It can just be that life has a lot going on and your body is trying to protect you with a combination of stressful factors combined with, especially maybe in early parenting, you might be so busy frantically running around after doing everything for your baby that you forget to eat. And I always used to remember hearing people say about forgetting to eat and thinking, how does someone forget to eat? I just don't believe that. And that was partly because I was thinking about food all the time. So in my head, it was like, why would you forget? But also that's true with sometimes in life, we do have that stage where we might forget to eat, skip a meal inadvertently and then get to the evening and try and make up something that we just can't get enough. We haven't taken in enough throughout the day. And so then the next day we're really hungry, but we're like, why am I so hungry today? What is going on here? But it's actually from yesterday before where we have a deficit. So, yeah.

Yeah, we're rushing from one thing to the next. I'm a coach of 5.30 a.m. group here on Wednesday mornings in Austin, and I think about the people that are going from a hard workout to work and rushing to get there and maybe not taking the time to properly refuel after that effort. And maybe they grab a bar or something, but very inadequate relative to the output that they just put out. And again, all under the guise of, hey, just trying to be efficient and move through life in a way that makes sense for me and get everything in, but inadvertently perhaps taking in not enough for the body to rebuild itself after that hard effort. I want to drill into the male-female side of this. Obviously it can affect both genders or anyone who identifies as non-binary. How might it manifest differently in different people?

Yeah, so some of the symptoms, they are kind of a good do-go across the board. Like I mentioned, digestive issues, that is something that runners can easily put down to, well, I'm just a runner and my body metabolism is working fast or something. But if that is happening regularly, if people often lean it on IBS or something like that, or my stomach is just upset at the moment, that is definitely one that can affect anyone, as is kind of the very driven anxiety, I got to be the best, I got to do everything right kind of person. But yeah, low testosterone is definitely the symptom that comes through for people who identify as male, but it's maybe not something that you're going to notice, but it is just feeling maybe low on energy. As I said, like a low libido, but that's another one. And it's just like a fatigue, which again is an easy symptom for runners to be like, well, I'm just running a lot, so I'm tired. But it is just a version of that, like, feel it in your bones, just sluggishness and struggle to, you know, maybe do simple tasks or feeling like you just want to lie down or you need extra coffees, which is where we get ourselves into trouble because people then just drink more coffee to wake themselves up. So it's just a lot of feelings of fatigue there. And on the female side of things, some people actually do have a period or they might have a one day cycle or they may have something every 40 to 60 days, which is still not really enough. Or even maybe seeing that days between increase. So maybe you were like solidly at 30 day cycle and then it's going up to 32, 34, 38. That is your body saying, hey, I'm starting to struggle here. And okay, there is the group of women who are maybe starting to go through menopause and that kind of can mess with them. But for the most part, it is a good indicator. But yeah, I mean, I think really the testosterone and menstruation are really the only differences between the two. The other symptoms can definitely affect everyone. And it's just unfortunate that there are things that we can easily write off.

And I see these tweets occasionally on Twitter and where somebody might say, well, if you're not falling asleep in your cereal bowl, you're not doing marathon training right. And as a coach, I wholeheartedly reject that approach. Because sure, we can be tired, we can have a bad workout here and there, but it's that ongoing lingering fatigue where you can't perform basic functions that is a sign that something's not right. Could be RED-S, could be overtraining syndrome, it could be something else that's saying, hey, you need to actually rebalance your recovery, your stress and recovery cycle in order to actually get the most out of your body. But those are red flags.

Yeah, and irritability with that as well, like an inability to tolerate small things that people do that frustrate you. There's definitely a kind of everyone else is doing this life thing wrong because you're just on edge and just exhausted, so you don't have the energy to process.

Let's talk about diagnosis. You were in a situation where you were having to figure it out on your own. You said you went to multiple doctors and they told you to stop running. Not the answer any runner wants to hear. So if someone is suspicious that maybe this is something they're facing, how do they get diagnosed?

Yeah, the best thing to... I mean, you have to go through your general practitioner probably who is probably still going to give you the same answer that mine gave. We can't really do much unless you want to eat, unless you want to stop running or stop exercising. If you get someone who doesn't do that, then that's amazing and be eternally grateful for that. Keep that doctor forever. For women, definitely speaking to an OB, GYN, especially if periods are missing and they've been missing for a while or even people who have never had primary amenorrhea, never had a period, they are just going to make sure that everything is okay internally. I did go through all those tests just to make sure. But if it is someone who knows you have had a functioning cycle in the past and you know deep down, because that's the thing to everyone listening, you know deep down if this is affecting you, you can go get a diagnosis, but what Chris and I have been talking about here, you'll feel it in your gut. Like I know you feel it right now. So if you suspect it, you're probably right. But if you actually want to go get that confirmation, an endocrinologist is probably the best person to go see. They're going to be able to really see those hormones and to give you the solid evidence that this is going on, that your reproductive hormones aren't functioning correctly, or you don't have enough of them. They'll get to see the phases of the cycle and where you're at. Because it's kind of more of just a leveling off of everything. There's no ups and downs as there typically is with a cycle. It's just going to be flatlined. So they will be able to see that. So yeah, I would say to go to an endocrinologist, if it is possible to go to a dietician, they will be the one to look at your fuelling and see where things are at. You can ask around through your running community. I mean, Chris, I'm sure you have someone in Austin who is a solid dietician who understands runners. But there's also resources online, and I can pass a few of those through to you to get acquainted with a dietician who is an expert in this area. And they in themselves, while not a scientific diagnosis, will be able to say like, hey, this isn't quite matching up. And one last thing I want to mention, just because this is me, be honest with them. I saw quite a few different people who looked at my diet over the years, and I would intentionally or unintentionally, however you want to put it, put forward a day that looked good, because it's hard. I'm a people pleaser, a recovering people pleaser. So be honest with them. Don't show them a day where you did really well. Be honest, because you're only hurting yourself.

Right. In the videos, you talk about assembling a recovery team of sorts, because it may mean more than one resource needed to help you work through this. Likely a doctor involved, likely a dietician, potentially a therapist, to help you work through some of the mental challenges. How does somebody know who they need on their team?

Well, firstly, I want to say with the therapist that a lot of the time with this, yes, as you said, sometimes it can be inadvertent, and it is truly driven by performance of, I really want to give it my all to my running. So I'm just doing this in terms of performance. And sometimes that's still the case with what I'm about to say. But with most of us, it is not actually about the running or about the food. It's about something inside of us that we haven't addressed. Like I mentioned in the beginning about not enoughness or like once I was the hedonic treadmill. Is that the term? Like once I reach this thing, then I'll be happy. Once I run this time, then I'll be happy. So until we address that, even if you are able to get your fueling correct, it will probably find its way out somewhere else. But in terms of finding a team for you, I would say again, if anything I've said today speaks to you in terms of the way that you look or seeing pictures of yourself and feeling that kind of like, like you don't like what you see, that almost certainly will require a dietician and therapist combination, the dietician to really give you the, make it clear to you just how much or make it clear the work that you need to do. And that was really the case for me with Nancy, who's one of the experts we used. As I said, I've spoken to many nutritional experts over the year, but Nancy, the way she put it to me, finally made it, as my grandma used to say, like the penny drop, the realisation of, oh, wow, yeah, I'm actually not doing this right. So that is a huge piece of this. And then the therapist. But beyond that, it's just those are the first two and the most critical two, I would say. It's also going to be looking at what you already have. So do you have people who are supportive and loving and encouraging of you being yourself, surrounding you? Or do you have people who you've grown up with who constantly make comments about the way that they look? Or even like, oh, you're having another portion of food. If you have those people around you, you're probably going to either need to seek friends who do understand you and who don't say things like that, or additional counsel from some kind of professional to work through all of those little comments that have been made throughout your life. And so it's finding the people around you who you feel safe to talk through those fears you have and those feelings that you're experiencing.

Yeah, because we're talking about deeply embedded thought processes in these situations. And I think oftentimes people think that therapy, going to therapy equals weakness and really all of us, you know, likely need it in some form. And so it's going to somebody that can help you disrupt some of those deeply rooted things. When I think about it in the context of I've had conversations with athletes that would say, well, my race weight is X and they have this very rigid perspective on how much they should weigh in order to perform. And maybe that's the right number for your body. I don't know, but most of the time there are likely deeply embedded thoughts and beliefs about your body and how it looks that is getting you to hold on to that number. And so we need help to break those thought patterns.

Yeah, absolutely. And race weight is an especially dangerous one. I remember asking, talking to Ryan Hall about this years ago, and he was saying, my race weight is this. Like it was like, it wasn't, I want to say it was like 137 pounds or something. And we know Ryan Hall is no, I mean, now he's kind of gone the other direction, but he's not like a tiny person. And so he was talking about that, but then he was like talking, and I said to him at the time, like, was that like good for you to be so obsessed with a number that ends in a seven? Like how easy that could fluctuate to be an eight or a six. And recently he's been talking about how damaging that was for him to be so caught up in what that number was that he lost performance in that. And while we're told about race weight and that being a key factor, I don't think the mental damage that does on us is worth the plus or minus five pounds, let's say, that being your quote unquote ideal race weight is worth. And I do agree, that's something that people very much lean on for performance, but I have to ask how much of your mental energy that you could be spending on challenging yourself in a healthy way or other parts of life, are you wasting on just a number that could be changed simply by eating chia seeds that cause you to retain water?

Yeah, or just drinking a glass of water, which you need to hydrate. So going back to the support system for a moment, we haven't mentioned coaches. I think that's an important part of the equation, engaging your coach in this conversation if you have one and your family and other support system as well. In your situation, your coach was also your husband, Steve. So, how did that conversation play out with him? How did he play a role in helping you recover?

Yeah, he is very much of the food as fuel approach to life. And so for him, in many ways, it was very difficult to understand what I was saying here and all the ways I was tying myself up in knots about this stuff. And actually, even yesterday, we were getting bagels and someone in front of us was asking about the weight of a bagel. And he was like, why would you need to know that? And I was like, well, because of a calorie counter. That's why. But he just doesn't think about that stuff. But it was important to talk to him about that because it helps him to get to be a better coach, to recognize patterns. But also, it is something that, I mean, we're beginning to scratch the surface, particularly for women in terms of how your menstrual cycle can affect your training, how you can get the most out of your training, looking at the phases of your cycle, what foods you should be leaning on during various phases of the cycle. So engaging your coach in that is going to not only help educate them, but also help them understand you. It's going to help them give suggestions to you. And this is also a person that you trust, right? You or you should. If you trust them to put all this energy and time that you are spending on your performance, you should be able to trust them enough to have this conversation about something as critical to your body as anything else and also affects 50% of the population. And so you're helping to change the culture around this being a taboo topic. So we all have a role to play here.

Yeah. It's not just taboo, but there's also just so much misinformation, I think, that made me think about Christine Yu's book that's coming out. You can preorder it now called Up to Speed. It's about the science of women in performance and sport. And she has a chapter called Period Power. And there's so much bad information out there or misconceptions out there about the relationship between your period and performance to the extent that in parts of the running world, people might say it's better not to have your period, but the period represents hormonal balance that actually will help you perform if you have it functioning in the right way. So it's so critical to make sure you're working with somebody that understands that and that you obviously also understand that yourself.

And that's where I hope people listening to this, if you're coach, if you're not comfortable talking to your coach, just send them to that YouTube channel and they can learn about it on their own. And then maybe they can come to you. And Chris, you can probably attest to this that like, as this has been a topic that hasn't been discussed, as you are a male, like I bet you felt quite uncomfortable at the beginning having this conversation because it just isn't something that we've been told should be discussed. But over time, as you continue to do so, it's like, well, why did I feel weird about this? Because it's such a normal human function. But maybe by sending the playlist to them, they can learn about it. And then maybe a little awkward conversation at first can go through, but then you can both work together moving forward.

Yeah, I mean, we're talking about the way the body works. And so it's never been that uncomfortable for me because I talk to people about a lot of things that can be uncomfortable. But I do sense that lack of comfort oftentimes in the athlete who's thinking, well, I shouldn't, this is something I'm not supposed to talk to people about. And you sense that hesitation. Usually, for me, I'm just very open and not pushy about it. It's like, all right, we can have these conversations, but I'm going to let you develop that comfort and then come to me as you're comfortable. But that's an aside. Let's talk about recovery. How do you work through this? Obviously, you want to assemble your team to help provide guidance. But I've had people ask me simple questions such as, well, how do I know how much to eat if I haven't been getting that right?

Yeah, and we have created a private community that does answer all of those questions. So if someone is interested in that, I can definitely send that along. We haven't really been pushing that yet because I really just want to get the education piece, but it is there. It's ready. However, again, dietician is definitely the way to go. And I understand that seeing a dietician can be an expense that you have to pay for yourself. But often it's not like a therapist that you're going to need on an ongoing basis. You maybe need two to eight sessions with them to work through some things. So it isn't a forever expense, but that will help to really understand your body and what it needs. And each dietician will have their own approach to this. But they also will be able to teach. Like we talked about unlearning or breaking those patterns that we've had since childhood. They'll be able to help you see those right in front of you and give you a different work around. And then in terms of I want to just mention at this point that, yes, I stopped running, but I no longer believe that is what you have to do to get to get through RED-S. I do think and actually there's a lot of research coming out now that I think I was a bit of a rare case in that way. But it's actually could be more damaging to athletes to just stop doing everything exercise wise and focus on getting their body functioning again, because then you're just obsessing about it and you're hit being hit twice. So there's actually studies coming out now that are finding that it is better to have some, you know, maybe not 60, 70, 80 miles a week, but some exercise in there while people are in their recovery. But I also think it is possible, as I said, sometimes it can be just a matter of a bowl of oatmeal. So try first, just adding 300, 500 calories to your day somewhere. I'd probably lean more for the morning as many of us tend to, you know, not do enough throughout the day and then try and catch up at night. And see if that works, because sometimes that is all it needs. And give that a try first, and then if not, then work towards the dietician. Maybe give that a month or two. And yeah, and then I just, you know, going on the uncomfortable subject for women, especially like the one of the big indicators, you're going to know that something is happening is a change in your cervical fluid. So if it's kind of been the same all month, every month, and it's starting to change throughout the month, that's a sign you're on the right track. So pay attention to that.

The flow increases. Do you believe that you have to set aside a big goal to work through this?

Yeah, and this is another question we had a lot. And I can't remember if that one is on the YouTube. No, I think that one is on, yeah, that's on the YouTube channel. This multiple variations of this from the experts. I think that you probably are going to find it hard to continue with a goal, because if you're already having trouble getting enough in when you start adding in, it depends, I guess, on your relationship with food. But for those of us who, and I was definitely there, who have a disordered relationship with food, that's going to be an extra mental burden on your shoulders, knowing that you're kind of going against what that inner critic is telling you to do. And for me, at least, I found that that inner critic made it difficult to go against the voice, that little siren going off in our heads when we're trying to run hard, saying, stop, stop, stop, because you're already spending your mental energy on going against the voice saying, don't eat that. But I think it is possible. And I think if someone has a goal and they're right in the middle of training for it now, it's worth a try. As I said, adding in that 500 extra calories a day to see. But then you've got to promise yourself that after this race, regardless of what happens, you are going to address this before you set up another goal.

Yeah, my intuition as a coach tells me that people should pause if they can. Take a moment, sort this out, get the body functioning normal again, normally again, and then resume that pursuit. Because ultimately, you're going to reach your biggest potential if you figure this out. This is about having a healthy mind and body. You're going to get further than you would have if you address this in the right way. And giving yourself a little time out to do that, I think, for the long-term potential that you should see. How long did it take you to work through it?

Again, this is where I was a kind of unique case in that I was able to just, I stopped running. I didn't run a step for three months. I didn't exercise. I had acupuncture. I rested. I was able to do all and I ate a lot. I don't want to say amounts because again, the number and the scale doesn't matter, but I put on a pretty big percentage of my body weight onto my body in a very short period of time. Whether that was the healthiest way to do it, I don't know. But it worked. And as I said, I was pregnant at 10 weeks after I stopped running. So for me, it came back very quickly. My endocrinologist had told me three to six months is what they expected. During the recovery period, I'd say definitely lean on the three to six if you are going to continue running, which is what I would imagine most people will do. And it's probably the more sustainable way of doing it. So yeah, I was on the lower end, but I think that was, I just went a very extreme way of doing this.

And then how did you go about establishing a lifestyle? Because at some point you had kids, but you've gotten back to running and now that's a part of your life. So how did you go about establishing a lifestyle where you were able to create balance afterwards?

Yeah, I mean, I think part of it was, and this is the, I think an important thing I want to mention first is that we are kind of told that the only reason you need your menstrual cycle is when you want to have babies. And that was very much what I was told by the doctors of like, well, you're not, are you looking to have kids anytime soon? And I'd say no. And they'd say, okay, well, you know, that's kind of what you need. So for someone who is not someone who wants kids or currently wants kids, that it can be easy to push this off because you're like, well, that's all I really need it for. But you are going to be a better human, a happier human, you're going to have better relationships coming out of this, so you'll feel more fulfilled, you'll feel more loved, if you do this, regardless of whether you want kids or not. But for me, I was pregnant, and I was aware once I found out I was having a daughter, that really for me was like, oh, wow, I could easily pass these patterns, these viewpoints, this focus of on weight, this hiding or squirreling of food onto my daughter. So I don't want that. So I started to do the mental work during that pregnancy time. And I mostly got myself to a good place. I actually found myself a bit swinging the other direction when it came to my second daughter because I suddenly was at the point where we were saying earlier about forgetting to eat. I just didn't wasn't really interested in eating. And I kept saying, you know, I wish I could just drink a drink at the beginning of the day that was like 3000 calories and then call it good. So then I swung the pendulum the other direction. And that I was like, going from thinking about food obsessively to kind of wishing I didn't need to eat because I just couldn't be bothered to do it because I felt, as you know, with young kids, you're like frazzled and just everything like chewing a carrot felt like effort to me when I had a newborn and a two year old, because I was like, this is too much work for for the calories I'm getting. And so now I'm trying to find a place where it is of a balance. And I think a lot of that is just trusting myself, which is the hardest piece we have. We're taught to use calorie counters or, you know, you should be eating this or that or whatever. I try and just trust myself. So, if I'm craving some sugar, like if I'm like, I need sugar right now, that's my body saying, hey, you're a bit low on fuel right now, so give me some fuel. And that doesn't mean I don't eat the sugar, but I'm like, okay, I need something else with this because I'm clearly at a deficit at this point in the day. So, listening.

Learning to address that intuition, which is hard, but once you start listening, the cues are there.

Yeah.

Constantly. So, we got to wrap this conversation. What's your final message of hope to those who might be struggling with something like this?

I think I would say that the biggest thing, most of you who this is going to speak to are standing at the edge of a cliff. And Chris, I'll send you this article I wrote in Self, which when my story went viral was definitely the piece and still is that speaks to most people. You're standing at the edge of the cliff looking, wondering whether you want to take this risk or shut this off right now and be like, Oh, I'm just gonna pretend I didn't hear that conversation. Do it. I know it's terrifying. It is going to challenge you in ways you can't imagine. But I promise you coming out the other side, you will feel healthier, happier. And again, your relationships will improve, which is one of the best parts of being a human, is our communication connection with other humans. And so it's worth it. I promise it's worth it to go through this.

Thank you, Tina. Thanks for putting together this resource. Amazing. I'll link to all of this in the show notes so that you can get access to it. And just those that are facing this, you've got two and Tina and I that are in your corner. So we will tackle this together. Thanks so much for coming on.

Thank you.

So there you go. My conversation with Tina Muir on RED-S. I will link to all the resources we mentioned in the show notes, so do check it out and do check out. Regardless of whether or not you suspect you might have RED-S, I would encourage you to check out the YouTube channel, watch some of the videos, get educated on this topic. We'll wrap this episode here. Thanks for listening. Thanks to Tina for joining me. As always, you can check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Twitter, Instagram or Facebook at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.