Hey, everybody, welcome to episode 358 of the Running Rogue Podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung, coming to you from Houston, Texas. Of all places this week, you're visiting family for the holiday. Happy Thanksgiving to all of you. I am thankful for all of you. I'm also thankful to be back with you with another episode today. We've got another rendition of me coaching up listeners, as we've got another listener on today, listener Maeson, who will be on in just a moment. So we'll get to that in just a second. I'm excited again to be back with you. Got a couple of quick notes before we get started. One is that for those that are looking to join the Crushing Boston Virtual Group that James and Coach Cathy will be leading, leading up to the Boston Marathon in April, that group opens up really soon. It's opening up here on December 1st. That group will kick off on December 9th. So make sure if you're interested, you email coaching at roguerunning.com in order to get on the list so that we can get you to sign up link when that opens up next week. The other thing is that for anybody who might be interested in virtual training, especially virtual one-to-one training, we've got a host of virtual one-to-one coaches who can lead you at different price points from $175 a month up to $250 a month. If you're looking for that individualized one-to-one virtual coaching with a custom plan made just for you with weekly check-ins with your coach, if that's something you're interested in, you can also email coaching at roguerunning.com. I know we've got a bunch of people kicking off training for spring races coming up really soon. So if that's of interest, email coaching at roguerunning.com. We have a whole host of great coaches that work within the Rogue family who can get you to whatever your goals might be. So check out either of those options if you've got goals on the horizon. Now, let's jump in to my conversation with listener Maeson. Here we go. All right, welcome Maeson to the show. Maeson, how are you?

I'm good. How are you doing?

Doing well. Happy Thanksgiving. Hopefully you had a good holiday.

Yes, I did.

Where are you joining from today?

I'm in Durham, North Carolina.

Okay.

Yeah.

Did you grow up in North Carolina?

I did not. I actually grew up in Kansas, and then I lived in Dallas for 10 years before my husband and I moved out here in August.

Okay.

Yeah.

What part of Dallas did you live in?

North Dallas. So in the city of Dallas, just north, near Richardson.

Okay. I grew up in the Dallas area, but East suburbs, Rowlett, Garland area, so East of Dallas.

Okay. I used to work in Rockwall.

Okay. Yeah. I had aunts and uncles and cousins that lived in Rockwall, and our house actually backed up to Lake Ray Hubbard, which is sort of between Rockwall and Rowlett. So, not far away there. Where did you work in Rockwall?

I am a behavior analyst, so I work at a private autism center.

Okay.

Yeah.

Cool.

Not cool. Yeah.

Awesome. Well, that's amazing. What are you doing in North Carolina now?

Same thing. Just I work for a different company. They actually started in Austin, and they've grown kind of all over. They have a few clinics in North Carolina, so that's why I'm here.

Cool. Love it. How did you become a listener of the podcast? I'm curious.

Through social media. So I follow a couple of girls you've coached on Instagram.

Okay. So probably Nicole and maybe Taylor.

Yes. Both of them.

Nice. That's awesome. Yeah. They're great to coach. Great humans when you meet them in person. And I've had a lot of people connect to me through their platforms, which is cool. Love it. So let's talk about your athletic journey before we dive into the running journey specifically. Where does sports start for you?

Yeah, I grew up playing sports ever since I can remember. Honestly, I was very much a tomboy when I was little. I played everything from basketball, soccer, volleyball. I even did like cheer and dance in the small town that I grew up in. But honestly, I always ran too. My mom was a runner, and so I grew up running with her. But loved doing everything, every sport.

What did that running look like with her?

It was fun. I think it was a way for me to kind of do something with just my mom and I, because I had siblings. And it was always something that I kind of like admired that she did. So it was fun to be included in that with her.

Was she doing races?

No. When she was younger, she did races. But then as a parent, I never really saw her do races. No.

Okay. So just casual jogging with your mom.

Yeah.

That's cool. And I assume you're also running for sport, but maybe as punishment during that window of time?

Yes. Yeah. I actually was part of a track club too growing up. So I ran for punishment, but also in races as well.

Okay. What did that look like? Were you doing races yourself?

Yes. Honestly, I did some sprinting. I wasn't very good at it. But I loved the 800 in the mile, so those were the ones that I mostly did growing up.

How did you enjoy it? Were you good at it?

I was average. I wouldn't say I was the best at it. There were days that I loved it. Honestly, I loved just going on a run. I didn't really care for the races. So I liked practice. I liked meeting people through that. But the races, I just remember dreading them, to be honest. It was always my least favorite thing for running.

What did you not like about that?

I think the nerves and the pressure of trying to perform your best was always just a lot for me.

Okay. How old were you at that time?

I think I started, I think I was like 11 when I first started my track club. And then some years I would do it, some years I didn't do it. And then of course, like when middle school started, that's what I focused on was running mostly. And then high school, that's what I did was cross country and track.

Okay, how did that go in high school?

It's fun. I think it was the same thing of I loved practices. I loved meeting people. I loved making friends from it. I hated meets. I did not like the pressure of cross country meets or track meets. But I liked running.

Okay. What was your best race in high school?

Oh gosh. I think it was the relays. My 4x8 team made it to state my freshman year, and that was really exciting. I think that was my most favorite race. Okay.

So the team element probably took some pressure off there.

Yeah.

Nice. So then you go to college, did you run in college?

Not like for school. I just would run just to exercise and stick with it. That's when I moved to Texas. And so I actually did my first half marathon that December in Texas, in the Dallas half with my uncle, who I admire him very much. He does Ironmans and Triathlons, and he's ran marathons and half marathons. So he was the one that kind of led me into my first half marathon.

Okay. When was that?

December of 2014.

Okay. And that was the actual Dallas marathon, the December one versus some of the others around town?

Yeah, it was the actual one.

How did that go for you?

It was good. My goal was to go under two hours. I did it. I remember carrying my phone in my hand the whole time to listen to music because I think then I didn't even know about the running belts that you could have or anything like that. So I just carried my phone with me the whole time. Looking back, I still can't believe I did that.

Whatever it takes, right? And you got your goal under two hours. Did you train specifically for it or were you still just running casually at that point?

I was training for it. I did the Hal Higdon beginner half marathon. Okay.

Did your uncle run with you or was he just in the race as well?

He ran with me.

Okay. That's cool.

Yeah. It was fun.

And how old were you at that time?

I was 18.

Oh, wow. And you were going to college in Dallas?

Yes.

Okay. That's cool.

Yeah.

So first half at 18, and you were following a specific plan. I bet your friends thought you were crazy.

Yeah. They did. Yeah.

They're like, what are you doing? We're all going out partying, and you're running long runs.

Yeah.

That's amazing. What was motivating you at that point?

I think moving and just kind of like a fresh start in a lot of things. I think it helped like, okay, I want to do something really cool and big. And at that time, it felt really awesome, and it felt really cool to do that. And running has just always been something that I enjoyed to do. And to my uncle was a big part of that, of kind of having me race, cause like I always ran, but he kind of led me into doing a race.

Were you nervous for that one?

Yeah, I think so. That was my first like big road race. So I was pretty nervous. But I didn't have really like a big time goal for myself. I wanted two hours, under two hours, but it wasn't like a big, it wasn't that big of a deal to me. I think of just like finishing the half marathon was what I really wanted to do.

Yeah, that's awesome. And where did it go from there?

I took a race hiatus. I didn't run another race until 2020.

Okay.

Yeah, so six years.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Were you running during that time?

Off and on, I kind of got into other modalities of exercise. So weight lifting, yoga, all of those types of things.

Yep. And what prompted you to get back into it in 2020?

I had a friend, and she knew that I liked to run casually. And so she said she was signing up for the Dallas Marathon, and she wanted to do it with me. So we signed up, and then, I think it was, was it the 2021? Yeah. Then COVID happened. So it ended up being a virtual marathon.

Okay. So you did a virtual marathon?

Well, I had got injured, so I didn't end up actually doing the entire marathon, but she did.

She did.

Yes.

Okay. So you were training to do it virtually, but didn't get to it. She did it. That's amazing.

Yeah.

Mad props to anybody who did a virtual marathon during the pandemic. That was a special time for sure. So what happened to you? What was the injury?

My hip flexor. I got a hip flexor strain.

How did that happen?

I am not very good at resting or taking easy days easy.

Okay.

So I'm pretty sure that's what happened. Just too much all at once where I wasn't gradually built.

Got it. So that takes you out. You don't get to do the race, which honestly might be for the best, considering that was a virtual experience.

I know.

So then-

So that's my friend, but-

How were you able to build back after that injury?

Yeah, I focused on strength training. When it started feeling better, I would kind of gradually run. I did some run walks, went to the chiropractor, PT, all of those things, and then eventually started feeling better. So I signed up for some more races, half marathons, and then in 2023... Was it 23? Yeah, I ran the Chicago Marathon.

Okay. Well, tell me about those other halves first. How did those go?

Good. They were good. They were just local races, kind of super last minute decisions, because I had been consistently running, but I didn't necessarily train for a time with those. Okay.

And how did they go?

They went well. My times kept getting faster. I was PRing, which was exciting. I think going from under two, I think my first one was a 156, and then I was staying around the one upper 40s on those ones. Okay. No injuries. It was great. Yeah.

And still using the Hal Higdon plans, or something different?

Kind of just my own plans.

Okay. Figuring it out?

Yeah. Just doing kind of my own thing.

Was your friend still training with you?

She would run with me, yes. But we weren't specifically training together for the same races.

Okay. What was motivating you at that time?

I think the... I liked seeing how I was getting faster in the races, and kind of seeing, okay, this next one, just seeing if I could get faster. That was motivating kind of the time of it.

Did you find that same pressure and same sense of nerves that you had in high school?

Yes, not necessarily for like those local races. I think the bigger the race, definitely. Yeah, and I think when I have a big goal or like a big time goal in mind, that's when I feel the most of that pressure that I felt when I was younger.

What are your coping mechanisms for that?

I journal sometimes. I like to talk. Well, my husband is great. I talk to my husband about it. You know, friends, my friend that runs, friends that get running. I'll talk to you about it. Cool. Yeah.

So tell me about Chicago 2023.

Yeah, I was training. Everything was going great. I didn't I kind of had a plan. I wrote up a plan myself, but it was based off of listening to podcasts and just kind of, you know, like how Higgins, but kind of made my own thing. And it was going really well until towards like a month or so before the race, my hip flexor started hurting again. So I went to go get it checked out and I had that same hip flexor strain. Yes. So I took a few weeks off. I kind of did cross-training, so biking a lot, elliptical things like that. But I was very determined to run that race because I was so excited that I got in by lottery. So I ended up running it that year.

Okay. How did the hip flexor respond in the race?

It was okay. I think I was full of adrenaline, and I was so excited to be there, and with the crowds, I didn't really pay much attention to it, but definitely after the race, it was painful.

How did the race itself go?

It went well. I PR'd by two minutes, which was exciting.

Well, hold on. When was your first marathon?

It was the Dallas. I skipped over that one, because that one was hard and not fun. That's why I didn't mention it.

Nice. When was the first Dallas?

I think that one was 2022.

Okay.

Yeah.

This one you PR'd by two minutes?

Yes.

What was your time in this one?

The first one I ran at 351.

351?

Okay.

Awesome.

Yeah.

How did that feel at the finish line?

I was very thankful to be done. I started off really fast on the Dallas. Very fast. I PR-ed my half in that one, so I crossed the half at 138 and just couldn't sustain it after I got to like mile 18, 19, which is hard because the Dallas Marathon, you're on the lake part, and there's not a huge crowd right there. Yeah. And then that hill right off the lake got me too. Yeah.

Yeah. Yeah. Dallas is a great race. I love that race, but it is lonely on the backside of the lake.

Yes.

So you go around White Rock Lake, about mile 18, there's just nobody over there because they're all on the other side, cheering on the other side of the course.

Yeah. Yeah.

And so it's just quiet, not a lot of motivation.

Yeah.

And then you get that hill, right? From like 20 to 21.

Yeah.

Coming off at the lake. So that can be tough, especially if you've gone out in 138. Yeah. Yeah. So did you manage the pace is better in Chicago, I hope.

Yes. Yeah. I negative split, which was great. I started off very conservative. I was not going for a time. I was just really happy to be there, to be honest, because of my hip, my injury. I didn't know if I was going to actually end up there or not. So I just made the most of it, honestly, and I started off very conservative.

That's good. Well, hopefully that taught you a nice lesson about execution with the PR. Finish. So how did the hip respond after that? Were you able to get it healthy again?

Yes. Yeah. Still saw my same PT, same Cairo, working on strength. Yeah, and I haven't had a hip injury since that race, which is great. Just continuing to do all the things to try to keep it strong.

Yeah. Knock on wood there.

Yeah.

I do think one thing, one lesson from those types of recurring injuries is that it teaches you things that you probably have to do the rest of your life in order to keep that hip happy.

Yeah.

So all of that PT stuff you've learned becomes prehab that you do on an ongoing basis to keep that hip happy, because usually that's just a sign. We've got some sort of deficiency that we always are probably going to have to work on. So don't ever stop doing whatever you learned during that process. OK. So what is that was just over a year ago, beautiful day in Chicago in 2023 with perfect conditions.

It's great.

What is the last year looked like?

I ran the half marathon in Eugene. That was probably my most favorite race I've ever ran. It was another really great day. And it was fun and I PR by a lot, which was more fun.

Nice. What did you run there?

I ran a 134.

Oh, wow. So even beat your Dallas first half. Wow, that's amazing. And that's a perfect way to finish on the Hayward track there.

Yeah, it was very motivating to see that. It was fun.

Awesome. So what did you do this fall? Or have you done anything?

Yeah, I was going to run, it's called Oak City Marathon here in the Raleigh-Durham area. And I had been training for it for a while. And a month before the race, my quad actually this time started hurting pretty bad. Okay.

What was that injury?

I didn't go get looked at, just because I'm new to the area. But I think it was overuse. I think I, this is just me assuming, but I think I went, my mileage, I went a little bit too much too quickly, and not taking my easy days easy. But I think I had strained my quad muscle.

Okay. When was that?

That would have been a couple months ago.

Okay, so that took you out of that marathon.

Yes, this is September.

And here we are today.

Yeah.

Are you back running again? Is everything healed?

I am, yeah, it feels great. I am still doing my PT strength exercises and I'm running about 20 miles a week right now.

Okay. What were you doing when you got hurt? Mileage-wise.

Miles-wise or?

Mileage-wise.

Yeah. I was at a little over 50 miles a week. Okay.

And when you say you don't go slow enough on your easy days, what does that mean?

I have all the intention to start off or to go very slow, and it just is very hard for me to take my easy days as like, my heart rate needs to be low, I need to be going at a slower pace. So I would run my easy days, they would still be like in the 830s or 840s, which for my pace, that definitely isn't easy.

Right. So you know better, but you can't help yourself.

Exactly.

All right. Well, we'll come back to that, because that's obviously a challenge that you need to sort through.

Yeah.

Okay. So here we are, present day, healthy, rebuilding. Do you have anything on the immediate horizon for what's next?

Yeah. I signed up for half in Charleston. It's in January. Okay.

What's the date on that?

January 25th.

And any other races in mind next year?

I would love to do a marathon. I just don't know which one. Okay.

TBD.

Yeah. TB decided.

Well, it's good that you're talking to me then. We can help sort it out. So, before I ask you my first question, what do you want from this conversation, speaking generally?

Yeah, I think, I don't... It's kind of like a plan, almost, or what I enjoy listening to your podcast is kind of, you process through with runners on kind of why they're doing what they're doing or what's motivating them. And I think that really is kind of what I need, an encourager to kind of help me with that, kind of with races. You know, I do it because I like it, but essentially what's the motivating key factor? Because there's a reason I'm motivated, or else I wouldn't be coming back to running races, after injuries. And too, I've never been coached, I've kind of just done it my way. So I like the idea of just having some insight into that.

Okay. So understanding your why is a big part of this. That's a big part of where I always start with people. So tell me this, what do you want? What's the biggest dream you have in the sport?

I have two big goals. I think one of them is the cliche, you know, I want to end up in Boston one day. I want to ultimately get there. And two, I want to keep doing this. Like, I want to be 80 years old and going on a run. So the longevity of it and just being able to keep enjoying it without getting injured.

What is it about Boston that draws you to it other than the obvious, which is that it's a goal for many?

I think it's the, you know, the race, the high, like, the biggest race in a lot of people's eyes. And to qualify for it, too, I think, is a big honor. And it is just something that really shows how hard somebody's worked, or the sacrifices you have to make to get there, or just the hard work that it entails. And I think getting there is, like, a reward for that.

So tell me this. How do you go from being the one who didn't want to race in high school because of the nerves and the pressure of it to the one that wants to go and do the race on the biggest stage for us average, normal people?

Yeah.

Where does that transformation happen?

I don't know if I necessarily like the idea of performing at Boston rather than like qualifying for Boston. You know, my goal has always been to be Q. That's kind of the first time I signed up for a marathon. That was like my expectation for myself, even though it was my very first marathon. And I think having that pressure when it comes to marathons hasn't helped with the race day performance, or the training with it either. I think that might be why I don't take my easy days easy, or I don't rest as much, because that's always like the looming thought, right, is the BQ.

Hold on, pause there. So is that a form of self-sabotage then, because you're trying to avoid the thing, or is it, you're overdoing it, you're overcompensating because you think you have to do everything on 10?

I think it's more of overcompensation. Yeah, I think that the feeling of, oh, I need to work harder in order to get that big goal is there. Okay.

So, but I'm still trying to reconcile. The one who avoided pressure in high school now wants the pressure of having a standard to chase in a race, including having the expectation that you'd be able to get it on your very first marathon in Dallas in 2022. So, connect those dots for me.

I don't know if I can. I think I like the idea of the big goal. I like having goals. I'm a goal-driven person. I think when it comes to race day or executing those goals, I do get very nervous. The pressure, I don't love it. I think that's why I probably gear more towards doing like a half marathon, because I don't feel like there's as much pressure because there's no big time qualifying goal for anything. I like to have big goals. I think it's scary trying to execute them for me.

Okay. So the dreams are there.

Yes.

Execution is a challenge. But I think part of that is just a lesson to you, which is that, if you're not afraid to dream big, then you have a fierceness, a fighter, a strength in you that you need to take ownership of when it comes to execution.

Right?

That's the same person who has that big dream, which is, you know, oftentimes, and I think I told April this, or I've mentioned it, maybe I mentioned it in the last podcast, most people can't dream big enough Mm-hmm. because they don't have context or because they self-deprecate. And so finding someone who can dream big enough is rare. But when I find those people, those tend to also be the ones that are bold in execution. And so it's a bit of a paradox to find someone that can dream big enough, but then is scared when it comes to execution. And that's okay. There's nothing wrong with you in that, but it's just, I think it's a matter of creating congruence between that dreamer and then the one who's on the start line ready to go do it.

Yeah.

Because it's the same person. And so all that power, all that strength is with you, and it's just a matter of taking ownership of it and living it out all the way through, not just in the dreaming part, but also in the training part.

Yeah.

And then in the racing on, then in the race day from that start line to that finish line. And so, you know, if we're thinking about whys, then that may be a why to latch on to, which is that, you know, this qualifying for Boston for you might be about taking full ownership of your strength and power.

Yeah, I think that's not something that I've ever sat and like processed with, but I think you're exactly right. I do have those big goals, and I know I can accomplish them. It's just when it comes, it's like a different person almost when I go on to that race day. Where I feel like I can accomplish it, so I think taking ownership, and that it's the same person who did the training, it's the same person that is towing the start line. I think it goes back to that saying of trust in your training, right? It's not just that one day, it's all those days that...

Trust your training, certainly, but really trust yourself, most of all. Tell me about your career.

Yeah, so I am a behavior analyst. I work with children with autism, so I help with communication, life skills, social skills, living skills. And I supervise a team of behavior tech people and behavior technicians where I kind of oversee therapy with the kiddos. But yeah, it's...

How and why did you get into that?

Yeah, so my undergrad was actually in speech pathology, so I thought I was going to be a speech therapist. And I ended up becoming a behavior technician myself when I was an undergrad. And it's kind of a niche career. I don't think a lot of people hear about it. But I stuck with it. I got my master's degree, and it's called Applied Behavior Analysis, and I became a BCBA.

Yeah, ABA therapy.

ABA.

Yep. I have a friend who's going through that process now to become an ADBA certified therapist.

Nice.

It's a hard road.

Yeah, it is. It's not easy. There are some days that are harder than others, especially when you're in school and studying for the exam to become a BCBA, and all the hours you have to get. But it's a very rewarding job.

Yeah, a lot of hours with pretty little pay.

Not the most rewarding job.

Yeah, right. But then you get the opportunity to make a real difference, because early intervention, as we know, is so important in those populations. So, I mean, that is a picture of strength, right? In many ways, is having the goal to be in that career, to then do all of the requirements, to finish your training in it, to get the certifications that you need. That's a lot of work, and it takes a lot of resilience and strength to get to the place where you are. And so, you know, it's sort of interesting when you think about that person, that woman who got to where you are in your career, then suddenly being timid on a start line. And I would imagine there were moments in that process where you're taking tests, you're doing different things, and you were probably nervous or scared and not sure if you could do it, right? But you did. And so, you know, sometimes when I run into people that have challenges with confidence, usually there's pretty good evidence in other parts of their life that they can do hard things. And for you, we don't have to look very far, right? It's evidenced by where you are in your career. So that, I mean, that would be one thing I would encourage you to reflect on. And you talked about journaling earlier, but this is, I think, a good topic of journaling to do is what are the characteristics that got you to where you are in your career and how you can map those to the same person who's executing in a race. It's all of the same strength, all the same resilience, all of the same tactical execution in terms of doing the work and being prepared, right? And it's not about being a different person or being even really growing as a person, even though growth will happen, it's more about just taking those exact same characteristics that you've already shown and exhibited in one part of your life and applying it to this part. Because you have all of it, you have the dreamer in you, you have the strength and power, you have the resilience, and it's just a matter of letting those characteristics take ownership in a different part of your life. So when we think about this goal for getting to Boston, you know, for you, it's just about being and embodying the full strength and power that you're capable of, which I think is a really powerful reason to want to do it. One of the things that I reflect on when we argue about the Boston buffer and the Boston process, which is sort of funny and kind of convoluted. But one of the arguments, Boston is about when people want to compare and say, well, you should just run faster and all of that. And yes, I fully in agreement with the fact that, hey, just make the standards harder, that's fine. But what I find that Boston is about for the everyday athlete, it's different for the elite athlete. For the elite athlete, Boston's about being the best, being the very best on the day. For the everyday athlete, and I think this is true whether you're a qualified athlete or whether you're fundraising for charity, I think Boston is about the being the best version of you. And the process by which you have to qualify or raise enough money to get in or whatever it may be, that is a sharpening process that brings out the best version of you. And so, the standard represents that. And I think here in this case, that's maybe even a magnification of it, because you've got that, the doubt and the challenges with confidence and the pressure you feel on a start line. And so, the embodiment, or what this race would embody to you is just that, it's being the best version of you, and taking full ownership of all of the strength and power you can bring to it. And so, write that down after we talk, listen back to this, see how it resonates. Because one thing we have to do when we think about our reasons is we also have to try them on for size. You have to write it down. Put it in your own words. Think about it when you're training. Think about it when you're on a start line. And see if it resonates. And if it resonates, then that will carry you. Right? That will carry you. Because this journey to get to Boston for you is not going to be a linear one. It's not going to be necessarily easy. You're going to have ups and downs along the way. You're going to have injuries, probably more of them. And you're going to have races that don't go the way you want. But eventually, you'll get there if you keep that reason why as your true north. Okay. So let's talk about now that we've gotten through that point. Let's talk about some of the tactics to get you there. And I think the tactics for you are going to be similar to the tactics for many that are relatively early in their running journey. They're going to be one building consistent volume over time. You got to 50 miles a week, which is great before your injury, but it sounds like that wasn't sustainable. So maybe we got there too quickly or we hadn't been there long enough to be ready for that level of volume. So building volume is going to be something important. And as a part of that, and we're going to come back to each of these, as a part of that, slowing down on your easy days will be fundamental to staying healthy along the way, but also to building the full amount of aerobic capacity that you can build. Because unless we're going easy enough, then we're not necessarily in the right aerobic zones to build aerobic capacity, but also to recover, which then allows us to sustain the higher levels of volume that are going to get us that big aerobic engine that we need. So slowing down, critical. And the third big thing I'm going to point to for you is just making sure we're being diverse in the races that we choose. And so just like I mentioned with April, occasionally training specifically for 5Ks and 10Ks is going to be a big part of the equation here. And you may not need that to get a Boston Qualifier. You know, if you can run a 134 and a half, then, you know, we could probably get you to a 325 without having to do a bunch of 5Ks and 10Ks. But if you want to reach your full potential, if you want to go beyond even Boston Qualifying, then you will. You're going to work in those shorter distances, right? Those are also fun and, you know, can be formative in the journey as well, because they're also, in many ways, they're low-risk ways to work on the pressure part of the equation. You know, you talked about halves being less pressure and feeling easier and more fun. Well, doing 5Ks and 10Ks, maybe even less. And while you might think that, well, how does that translate to the pressure of a marathon? And no, it can't ever fully equate. But the more at bats you get, the more you make standing on a start line something that's normal and comfortable, regardless of the distance, the more that will give you tools to bring into the longer distances and be ready. So those are the three things that I would highlight for you as critical. And these are their fundamental building blocks that will be critical for anybody. But let's kind of take them in turn for a second. And I actually want to go to the slowing down one first, because you already mentioned it. Yeah. Got to slow down.

Yeah.

Full stop. And a lot of people tell me this. They say, well, I can't slow down. It's too hard or whatever. And so, so, you know, the thing I tell them is figure it out, right? Make it work.

Yeah.

And I think there's a couple of things here. And now, I'm a little bit on a soapbox because this is an important one. One is you got to connect the easy running to the purpose and the why and the big goal, right? It's like you got to draw a straight line between those. You know, previously, you might go too fast because you think, well, if I go fast enough every day, then that'll make me faster. It's sort of an overcompensation, as you talked about. Well, we have to undo that thinking by rewiring the connection between easy running and your goal and your why. The easy running, and in fact, going as slow as you can on those recovery days, connects directly to your ability to someday get this goal. It's like you gotta draw that straight line in your head so that when you finish an easy run, and let's say you're doing four miles on a recovery day, and you run that in 44 minutes, I want the next thought to be, okay, that action is the exact building block I need to eventually get a Boston qualifier, along with a lot of other building blocks, but that is a fundamental one. So connect it directly to the success of being able to someday run that, I guess, 325 for your age group, right? And probably 320, right, is something you should probably be thinking about, right? So, yeah, so getting to that 320 is going to be directly correlated to your ability to run 45-minute, four-mile runs on your easy days, full stop. And I understand the psychology around why we think, well, if I do it in 36 minutes, you know, that's better, but it's not, because then that's an impediment to staying healthy, which is an impediment to being consistent, which is also an impediment to building the aerobic capacity we need to sustain a 745 or seven, what is that, 40-something for... So 38, 738 to get 320 for 26.2 miles. And one way to fix it, I think, is to overcompensate and go the other way. And so I want you... And it's like every single time, you have an opportunity to go run, an easy run, is a chance to practice that. And so I want you literally setting goals for yourself on those days for how slow you can do it and how comfortable you can make it going that slow.

Okay. How does that feel? It's a challenge, but I think it'll be good. It's something that I already know I need to do. And before we came into this conversation, I knew that was probably something that was going to be said. Right. But I like the piece of like, okay, this is my goal. Let's see how slow I can run this. Setting it that goal and making it for the big goal, right? Of this is what you want to do. This is the time you want. This is what's going to get you there. Right.

Because, you know, if you were building a habit tracker for getting to a 320 marathon, it would be a list of things you would need to do in order to accomplish this goal eventually. And one of the things on the list every single week is going to be at least two or three recovery-oriented runs that are probably four to six miles in length at a pace that's probably 10 plus minute miles. That would be on the habit tracker. That would be that list of the things you need to do to accomplish this goal. And so when you, every time you do it, you're checking off one of those habits that's going to eventually get you exactly what you want. So you got to slow down. And it's going to be hard. It's going to be uncomfortable. It will feel awkward. I always want people to go back and listen to episode 306 of my podcast, because I talk about the why behind slowing down. And one of the reasons that we don't talk about, about why it's important to slow down, there's obviously the recovery elements, the low intensity elements that support the aerobic capacity building that we want. But there's also, I think, a form benefit because when you can be efficient at slower paces, that will unlock efficiency at faster paces. So, you want to be able to be efficient at the full spectrum of paces. And when you're, when it's uncomfortable, when it's hard or awkward to go slow, that's a sign of inefficiency. That is likely also manifesting when you go fast, but you don't necessarily perceive it because we're naturally more efficient when we go fast. But you're still probably carrying some of those inefficiencies. So get efficient at slow paces to unlock even more efficiency at fast paces in addition to all of the other benefits. So we had to hammer that home, but you brought it up and you knew I was gonna talk about it, so here we are. Okay, so then building volume. So where have you been historically from a volume perspective? How many days per week? How many miles?

Yeah, I like to cross train, so I try to mix it up. I think when I'm specifically training for a marathon, I don't cross train as much. So that's why I try to do more mileage. I usually, like peak mileage, it's usually like upper 50s. I usually run about five days a week during marathon training. But like I said, I like to cross train. So usually I like to do three to four runs, and then the other days I'll do cross training.

What does cross training mean to you?

I do pilates, I do hip style workouts. Cycling is something that I'm really into as well.

When you say cycling, are you talking about riding on a bike outside? Are you talking about spin classes?

A little bit of both.

Okay. And when you do spin classes, what do those look like?

High intensity.

Okay. Okay. That's what I suspected.

Yeah.

Okay. Well, I have a whole episode on this. When it comes to running performance, I think cross training has a very specific definition. In my... And maybe it's just specific to me, who knows? But I think this is important to get right, because when we're talking about cross training for running, cross training for running equals other low intensity, low impact aerobic activity. Low intensity being the key word. So a high intensity spin class is not cross training for running. It is aerobic activity, but it is not cross training for running, especially if you're also doing running workouts.

Yeah.

And it can be in many ways counterproductive towards your goal of trying to qualify for Boston, because what ends up happening if we're doing too much of that is it means that we're always working the high intensity parts of the system, even if it's spiking, which prevents us from building the aerobic capacity elements that we need to really be our full aerobic, aerobically developed self. So, if I were you, I would want you to be doing consistently around at least five days of low intensity aerobic work a week. Now, in my preference, it would be running. If you're going to be specific, even if you're not signed up for a race, I would want you to be doing five days a week of running. You're around. And if you want to supplement with other aerobic activity, make it low intensity. Because part of what you're potentially going to have to get out of, at least until you get this goal, is the idea of only training a certain way because you have a race ahead of you. Right? It's like your journey and you're running, if you're going to be specific, should look more or less the same year round. And things will obviously get more specific and they'll ebb and flow as you have specific types of races that you're doing. But I would encourage you to have a running routine that looks more or less the same year round outside of vacations, outside of recovery periods after big races, that sort of thing. And that should look like five days of running that have discernible identities, right? A medium long run, a speed day, a long run day, and at least two recovery runs after the quality day and the long run day. And the distances that you're going on those days may ebb and flow depending on whether you're being specific or not. But they should have a place year round. And then in terms of Pilates, Pilates is a great activity. I call that sort of supplemental training, or you could call it strength training if you wanted. That isn't cross training by definition, but it is important. And if you like doing it, Pilates is one of the best ways to make sure that you're strong and stable, and that your core is ready to do what you need to do for 26.2 miles. So I wouldn't limit that at all. In fact, if you enjoy doing it, just try to do it consistently a couple of times a week, and that'll be a great supplemental building block as well.

I have a question regarding that. So do you have any advice on when you do Pilates? Is there a specific day based off of your medium long run, your workout, your long run? And do you have any advice on when to do Pilates too?

So I like strength-oriented things. Rule number one is to line it up as best you can with your medium long run and your quality days after those runs. So in an ideal world, if you were doing a medium long run on a Thursday and a quality day on a Tuesday, then I would love for you to do Pilates after those sessions later in the day, either right after or later in the day if you could. If you can't, that's okay. Because a close second is then just trying to do it consistently on the same days every week, so that your body adapts to that routine. Because your body will adapt to a routine. And so if it ends up being that Monday and Wednesday are better for you and you can do it consistently on those days, that's great. Just do it consistently on those days as much as possible. So that your body adapts to the routine. And it might take four to six weeks to adapt to a routine if you're switching it. But your body will adapt and then it will become a part of the process. And then the only thing that changes is when you get to the more intense periods of your race, then you might have to adjust a little bit in order to make sure you're not overdoing it. Okay, so, and then the other part of this, if you're thinking about volume, another part of this is also thinking about annual volume. This is where I think long-term metrics can be really helpful, is looking at how many miles do you run in a year? And how does that compare from year to year? Because if you can be consistent and consistently building your volume, your annual volume, then that's a sign of building that big foundation, that aerobic capacity that's gonna help you get your goals. I was talking earlier today with one of my virtual athletes who started out doing 200 miles a year, then built up to 800, then is now at 1500, is gonna end up at about 1600 this year. So has steadily increased that number. And I told him, I said, hey, I wanna see you next year get over 2000 miles for the year, over 40 miles per week. Because if you can average that for a whole year, then that's a sign that your aerobic capacity is starting to get to that place that's really gonna help you have staying power over the course of a marathon. But that requires that consistent routine that you're executing more or less year round. So for you, if I think about that routine, it's like that five days a week, a couple of Pilates sessions, maybe some spinning as well, but at low intensity. So I love biking, but just make it at easier heart rates, easier efforts, or make it more of a recovery type class. And all of that adds up to building aerobic capacity in a way that's going to help you get to this BQ. Any questions on that part?

No, makes sense.

Okay. And then the last bit, which I talked about with April, is working in some 5K and 10K specific training, where you're actually, you pick a 5K or 10K, or ideally a couple of them within a window of time. You know, I love people doing like a 5K, maybe three or four weeks out from a 10K as a prep race for the 10K, and giving yourself a chance to really see what you can do over the shorter stuff, and training specifically for it, and that will help you unlock efficiency at the marathon paces that is going to be really helpful. Because if you want to run 738 for a marathon, then that means you need to be able to run, you know, about 715 for a half, and probably 650, 655 for a 10K, and then probably about 630, 635 for a 5K, which is about, what is that? 20, 21 minutes for a 5K. So all of that points to an ability to go do this 320 for the marathon, and whenever you achieve those milestones, doesn't mean you get the marathon time, but it means you're getting close. And for the half itself, if you can run, I mean, for a 320, I mean, you're already getting close. I mean, a 134 might already be there if you apply that in the calculators, because that's really close. So you've got the potential, it's all there, and it's just a matter of now executing on the full training so that you can have that staying power over 26.2. So, let's go back to this conversation of 2025. January 1st. I have, so that's not that far away. We're what, six or seven weeks away. You're just getting back into your routine post-quad injury. I would spend the rest of this half cycle, just rebuilding, rebuilding volume in a safe way. So, adding three to five miles a week over those five days. Eventually, if you want to add a six day, then that's okay. But keep the efforts all easy. Practice these really slow recovery days. Modulate your distances, so you have an appropriate medium long run that might be eight to 10 miles, balanced with a quality day that might be seven or eight, with a long run that gets up to maybe 14 miles, if you can do it safely in that time, with a couple of recovery days. All easy, except one day, which will define as your quality day for now, even if it's not full blown quality. One day, you do four to six strides after your easy run that day, so you go seven or eight miles, and do four to five or four to six strides afterwards. That's your only speed between now and January. Okay. Right? And your emphasis is on volume and slowing down on the easy days. And then I want you to go run the half, and I want you to run it as fast as you can. With whatever you think is possible on that day, executing a smart race, all that stuff. But build the foundation for it only on easy volume and strides. I think you'll surprise yourself in January. But either way, low pressure race, right? Let's just go and experience it, enjoy it. Hopefully start relatively conservatively, finish strong. I wouldn't necessarily worry about PRing, but do try to get everything out of it, whatever you have on that day. And then I would love it if you spent the rest of the spring switching gears to train for a 5K or 10K. Pick one in May, for example, and that would be convenient to you somewhere local perhaps. 10K in May, find a 5K that might be three or four weeks before that, race both, keep that same foundation of volume that you built to the half, carry that into the 5K and 10K training. But now, you can add specific quality workouts that are geared towards speed, which you can probably find easily somewhere, or we can help you with that. But that will then allow you to take that volume foundation you've established and carry it into speed with the workouts. And it will be fun to see what you can get to by May for that. And then from there, you can pivot to a marathon for the fall. And I would pick one that's interesting, exciting, that is motivating for you. But we'll have a nine or ten or eleven month foundation to build off of for that race, including a half, not really a proper full half cycle, but a half a speed and then a marathon. And that's a good combination before you go back to that distance.

That sounds good.

So that's the blueprint. See where you can get to from a marathon perspective. And who knows, maybe you can take the full swing at it. You know, you don't need to limit now what's possible then. But all of the training between now and then kind of tell you what's possible. So there you go. And then after that, re-evaluate and figure out what's next. But just keep in mind that idea of always mixing in the different distances so that you're not just working on the marathon. Because that is also, by the way, a recipe for longevity. Just mixing up the distances. And you talked about that as your secondary goal. Okay, I'll pause there. What other questions do you have for me while you have this opportunity?

I would love to get insight too on fueling. I don't think I'm the best at it. So any advice you have on, you know, even like a quick guide to doing for the marathon or fueling for the half marathon and race. I think that's also been a big issue with my marathons. I just have never been able to get the fueling piece down.

What have you tried?

Usually I do gels. I have done like the Huma gels. I switched to the Goose. Those didn't settle very well in my stomach. I like the, I think it's the BPN Go gels. Those have been good. Yeah, those are usually the only, the three that I've. I've done the jelly, the jelly bean ones too. But for me, I found it hard. Yeah, I found it hard to chew while I'm running. I'd rather just not chew.

Why did you switch from humor out of curiosity?

I wanted to try something else, and I wanted to get more fuel. I didn't feel like they were actually giving me the correct amount of fuel that I needed. Okay. Yeah.

What frequency were you taking them?

I started off first like 45 minutes to an hour, and then I would go every 30 minutes from there. Okay.

That's generally a decent formula.

Okay.

So what do you think was off with it?

Um, I think it had gotten better. I didn't start off that way. It was just kind of like I switched it to that way based off of like advice from other people who are listening to podcasts. Um, I think it gets hard to actually execute that. The later for a marathon, the later the race goes.

Yep. Yeah. I mean, so this is where, you know, anytime we do a long run, we have a chance to practice it. And usually I recommend practicing fueling, regardless of what you're training for, once the long runs get over two hours. It's like, that's a chance. And you might have, in a half cycle, you might have a 14 mile long run that might be a little bit over two hours. That's a chance to practice fueling. And so every chance you get, practice it, because it does, the body needs to adapt to whatever you're taking, and also the frequency with which you're taking it. And the general formula to start is start about an hour in, but some people like to start earlier, so maybe as early as 45 minutes, but not probably before that. Start 45 minutes to an hour in, as you described, then come back to it. Usually I say as a starting point, 35 to 45 minutes later. And once you start that process, you have to keep coming back to it, because otherwise you'll have a sugar crash. So coming back to it every 35 to 45 minutes. And then from there, people, as we are learning, the more grams of carbs you can get in, the better, but it does take your stomach adapting to it. So then people can gradually start to shorten that interval as they're getting used to it and comfortable to go to maybe every 30 minutes and maybe even more frequently than that. So that's the general blueprint. Now, I think the trick is, one, finding something that you like, that tastes good, first of all, and that has a texture that you like, that goes down easily. And then secondly, also understanding the nuances of how that might change as your body gets more fatigued or as you get later in the race. Because when you're on your fourth or fifth gel, that same flavor may not taste as good, or you may get sick of it, or you may want a different consistency, or that brand might not work anymore late in the race. And so I've had people just be aware of that and switch flavors, maybe switch brands. For example, I have a lot of people that use Morton gels and a great product, but some people tell me that late in the race, they can't stomach them anymore for whatever reason. And so they might switch to a different brand or even a different flavor within a different brand. And so I think part of this is just playing with it enough in your own training that you're not always using the same thing so that you can take those little notes that you can then carry forward to race day. So, you know, instead of just taking the same flavor every time because you know you like it, get some different flavors, get some different brands, try them out, see what you think. Start to create that database in your head of what tastes good when, so that you can then assemble an array of them on race day that you think will actually work. And then, you know, once you get to those longer long runs, you'll have a chance to practice even more. And if you start to eventually do long runs with workouts in them, then that can also simulate how your stomach is feeling late in a marathon and what might be good late in those long runs, could then translate to late on race day. So, all of that experimentation, you have to be willing to do and make those little mental and even, you know, put in your journal those notes about what you like when. And just be okay with experimenting and then maybe even changing it up late, because I'll have people switch brands, switch flavors, sometimes even switch modalities, go from chewing something to taking gels late, you know, in a race. And all of that experimentation unfortunately for us requires you figuring it out for you. Because it's all, and we're all ends of one when it comes to nutrition on race day. But you know, you can learn from others, you can kind of take ideas from others and then hopefully find a formula that works for you. But I would just be deliberate about it, meaning every time you have a chance to do a long run over two hours, you're practicing it. I would be deliberate about trying different things, deliberate about taking notes about what works, what tastes good, and start to develop that formula for you. Because one of the things is, none of this happens by accident. If you're going to get this goal, it's going to happen because you have a plan, because you executed that plan, because you did the work in training, because you were diligent about your mental prep, because you had the raised day nutrition and hydration plan that you executed well. None of this happens by accident. You have to control what you can control in order to get the goal. So be deliberate about it. And the last note I would leave you is, relatedly be deliberate about the mental part. We identified that first as really the challenge, and that's not going to go away or get fixed, because we had this conversation. So I would definitely take notes from this conversation about what resonated from a why standpoint. Translate that into your own words. Use that as your true north. And I would also encourage you to translate that into affirmations that you can feed to yourself, that you can say to yourself, that you can show yourself visually every single day. And again, you have to put it in words that are going to resonate with you. But something about this idea of owning your strength should show up on your dashboard, should be on your refrigerator, should live in your husband's mind to remind you when he sees you struggling with those things. So that you can consistently reprogram in your brain that you have the ability and the strength to do this. So a little bit of homework for you. All right, any final questions before we sign off?

No, I think that's it. Thank you so much. This has been great.

Well, thank you. I really appreciate everybody who's emailed me. I got a long list now that I'll be working through because it takes a lot of bravery and strength to show up on this and be vulnerable with who knows how many people listening, so thanks for sharing your story. Thanks for being willing to talk about it and jump on with me. And I believe in you. So let's go do this and keep me posted and let me know if I can help down the road. All right. Thanks, Maeson.

Thank you so much.

There you go. Thanks, Maeson, for joining. Thanks to all of you for listening. We will wrap it here. As always, you can check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Facebook or Instagram at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.