Hey everybody, it is episode 26 of the Running Rogue Podcast. This is Chris joining, and as always, Steve is with me. Hey Steve.

Hello world.

We have got a very special guest today. Coach Mike Barnett from Luling High School is here to talk about lots of different things, from cross-country to high school, cross-country and track and field, to training principals, and we might even get into a little woo woo.

Mike, get a little woo woo.

We're excited about that. He's just off winning another state title with Luling and has had an impressive run of those. So we'll be talking about more on that in a second. Before we dive into our interview with Coach Barnett, we're going to be, as always, talking about current events. And there's some Memorial Day weekend happenings that kind of got overshadowed by Pre-Fontaine that I wanted to go back on, including one result from Pre-Fontaine itself. We had talked about Gabe Grunwald before on this podcast with some of her efforts this training season. She is now battling cancer for, I believe, the third time, and has a rare form of cancer that has now spread to her liver, but she's still competing. And so she was racing the B section of the 1500 on Friday at Pre-Fontaine, ran a 415 to finish ninth in her heat of 10, I believe, finishers. And she actually outkicked the other, the last place, who became the last place girl at the end. So she finished strong in that race. And so I wanted to mention her because I think NBC, to their credit, did a good job of calling her out, and Lewis Johnson was there interviewing her on the webcast. And so I wanted to mention her quote from that race. And then also talk about, she just started chemo this week on Tuesday, but is still going to be racing at the Music City Distance Festival this weekend, trying to get her 1500 qualifier for USAs. But she said to Lewis in that post-race interview at Pree, she said, I'm still in the fight. I have treatment ahead of me this summer. I'm really just trying to hold on to running because it's gotten me through so much. And to me, it's that story of somebody who finishes ninth in a race, you're not going to necessarily pay attention to, but what heart, what guts to keep competing. Now she's started chemo. We'll continue racing, trying to get that standard. So I wanted to call out Gabe because we'd missed, or at least we hadn't mentioned her result from Pree before. But an impressive and inspiring lady she is.

She's a hero, no doubt about it. And I think one of the things, you know, having coached a number of athletes who are in the position that she's in right now, where she's chasing a US qualifier, it's just the most uncomfortable position to be in for an athlete, from my experience as a coach as well, but certainly as an athlete, because you start chasing in a way that is... Every workout gets sort of affected by the fact that you need to get another race opportunity to see if you can get the time that you need to get. Recuperation, recovery from those races, all these things are incredibly difficult to manage and handle. And for Gabe, there's a three-fold challenge there. Number one, her body's not bouncing back in the way that it needs to because it's not healthy. It's in a tough spot, and she's also being forced to go through a regimen of things that are making it even harder for her to recuperate and recover. Number two, this is a world-class athlete. This is an athlete who was running at a world-class level who now is struggling to be a nationally relevant athlete, and yet she still keeps her chin up and is really, I mean, incredibly admirable in her, the way that she's approaching this. I cannot imagine internally how difficult it is for her to do this, and I just wanted to give our listeners a little perspective on, it's already a really hard thing to do, but to be dealing with cancer, and then to be dealing with the fact that you're not at where you thought you could be or where you could be, it's just a hat's off to her again for that kind of courage.

Plus, you're also beholding to the race and the other athletes and how those races go out, and sometimes races don't go out as fast as they need to, so you kind of get behind the eight ball. She's run 412 so far this season. She needs a 409. She's going after it again, and she says she's gonna keep trying, and I guess her chemo regimen is two weeks on, one week off, and it so happens that USA's falls on the NAWF week, so if she makes it, she says she's gonna go for it. So really impressive, any thoughts from you, coach?

I think she's chasing more than just the standard. I think she's chasing life, and she's demonstrating the power of the human spirit in the chase, and so she's an example on a lot of fronts, other than just a standard or an athletic achievement. She's showing the way for people who are struggling with adversity, and so she's chasing more than just a time standard.

For sure. And people need to know, she was a former US. Champion indoors in the 3K, so we're talking about an athlete who's competed at the highest levels, finished fourth at the Olympic Trials in 2012. So she's usually competitive, and so I know for her it must be tough feeling like her body's not giving everything it can, but we're rooting for you, Gabe, and I hope everybody listening is rooting as well. So follow along and watch her results as the season progresses. USA is for references at the end of June, so she's only got a few more weeks to get it done. So, wanted to mention, Gabe, the next one I want to talk about is the Boulder-Boulder 10K, which happened Memorial Day weekend. Massive 10K, I think it's, I know it's top five biggest 10Ks in the US. I know Peachtree's number one. I don't know where it falls in terms of one to five, but it's in there. It's a massive 10K. You finish there at Colorado Boulder Stadium. And you have the elite race, which is separate from the citizens race. And so the citizens get to watch the elites finish there. Really, really big deal. And it usually commands an elite, elite international field. The US men did something that has never been done there, which is they won the team competition, beating Ethiopia, which was the second place team. Leonard Carrier, Sam Chalanga finished 2-3 in a really close team battle. And that was, again, the first time the US has done that, so that's worth mentioning. Also, on the women's side, they finished second place, which was stout as well. Ethiopian women ended up winning there, so they kind of flipped on men's and women. But we have to mention good old Natasha Rogers, who shows up again third place there on the women's side, leading the US women to that second place finish. So here we have her performing again at the highest level. 10K, cross country, half marathon, so I think again we have more evidence that she's gonna be somebody to watch.

Yeah, I'm stepping out on a limb a little bit, protecting her to make the world's team for Moscow in the 10K. I think she will have huge, huge, a lot of people to try to beat, but I think the way that she's rounding into form in the race selection she's choosing, pretty amazing. So, I mean, I know it's gonna be incredible. You think about Molly, I'm sure, is gonna run. Marielle Hall's gonna run. I'm sure Emily Sisson's gonna run. I'm sure Kim Conley's gonna run. I mean, there's so many people that I know could be competitive in that race that I'm not even.

Emily Anfield.

Emily Anfield. I mean, it's just, Shalane Flanagan. Who knows? I mean, so you're looking at, but I think that Natasha has proven to be the queen killer. She knows how to close and finish. And if there's blood in the water, that's a shark. So just, just saying.

So impressive results there. Anything, coach, what do you think?

I just, I think she's developed really well over time and has kind of come out of quote, nowhere, but she's, you're going to have to reckon with her now. And she's taken a really nice approach and developed, you know, slowly. And I like what she's doing.

It's good to see her running well after her, you know, a few years where she was kind of out of the sport and now back to it, so.

Yeah, so she's an Aggie, for those who need to know, she's an Aggie, but she did grow up, I recruited her to try to come to Texas. I didn't have the scratch at the time, I didn't have money for her, but she is from Colorado, originally. So that kind of a race effort in Boulder at 6, 000 feet, while still probably not optimal for her, is definitely something she's accustomed to.

She's done before. So the other Memorial Day race that I had to mention, also a 10K, one of the largest, if not the largest UK 10Ks, the Great Manchester Run happened, and a couple of Americans, it was a big day because obviously Manchester, the recent terrorist attacks there, and the city was recovering from that, so they had a one minute moment of silence before the race, so it was a particularly poignant race for the city. We had two Americans lead the way, Nathan Ritzenhain, who finished first, narrowly beating Old Man Ligot by seven seconds in just over 28 minutes, really fast for a row 10K, and Nathan was racing in an A6 Singlet. I know there's rumors that he might be going to a Hoka sponsorship, maybe a Skeeter sponsorship. He hasn't finalized that yet, but it's good to see him still running well, and of course, Bernard Lagarde. At his age, I think he's 42 now, and doing it at the 10K, which traditionally hasn't done that well at that distance, is impressive. So those guys go one, two in Manchester. What do you guys think?

Well, it definitely looks like we can see where Lagarde's probably going and pushing towards. I don't think a marathon is in his future. I will be absolutely shocked if one is, but I definitely think we could be seeing him line up at USAs in the 10K, and I wouldn't be surprised at all. Assuming he's got a time, I'm not sure he does. I know he has a 5K, but it would be really interesting to see him in that race, and it would definitely dictate the way that race goes. I can guarantee you, whether he's in the five or the 10, everybody else in the race is going to make it real, because they are going to want to take the sting out of him. Yes.

For sure.

I think with Lagarde, he's a good case study for young runners on how to remain relatively healthy for a long time. I think folks ought to take a look at what he's done to stay sharp and race ready throughout his career. He's never had any big downtime due to a big injury. And I think that's intentional, of course. Runners want to be consistent, but he's a good person to take a look at and learn from as to how to stay healthy and race ready all the time.

Interesting, on that point, I was reading in Steve Magnus' new book, Peak Performance, which just came out this week. He talks about Lagot in the context of recovery and how Lagot takes a five week break every year and doesn't run at all to kind of reset the system before he reboots in the winter.

It's a canyon, that's where the canyons do it.

So that's a perfect example of making sure you're mindful of recovery. All right, so those are our current events. We're gonna stop it there. There's much more to talk about, but we'll get to it on future episodes. With summer track season kicking up, we may have to just have a whole episode on summer track, but we'll get to that soon enough. Before we dive into interviewing Coach Barnett, Steve, I wanted to give you a chance to give him a proper introduction because we only gave a brief one so far, and then we'll dive into the discussion.

Sure, so for a little relevance, I think I met, I'm actually 100% certain of where I met Coach Barnett for the very first time. It was around 1991 or 92, we were at Run-Tex, the former Run-Tex, it was at the corner of 12th and Lamar. He was sitting on the stadium seats that we had there, basically just watching us sell shoes. At first, I was like, who is this strange man sitting here, like just watching us sell shoes? And I had no idea who he was, and Coach Barnett is a, he can talk, but he generally comes off originally, initially quiet and not intrusive. He's definitely respectful of the space that everyone has. And so he was pretty, he was pretty quiet at first when we first, when I first met him. And I think he might have been an entire week before I finally was like, all right, who is this Jack Wagon? Like what's this guy's story? And I remember asking you, Coach, like, what are you doing? He's like, I'm just sitting here soaking it all in. I'm trying to soak it all in. And I'm like, are you working? You weren't even working. You were just sitting there and literally just soaking it all in. Now at that time, Runtex had a lot of heavy hitters working in the store. Paul Carozza, the owner, who is the godfather of running in Austin, Texas, and in Texas generally probably, who was always ready for a round of any kind of discussion, anything fun. And so people were talking, ideas were flowing. And so at that moment, I'll never forget that summer after that, I thought, all right, while Coach Barnett is a little unusual and a little strange, he also understands exactly how you learn information. It's not in a book, and it's not from one interview. It's from an extended period of steeping and understanding what's going on in a culture to get the things that you wanted. So Coach Barnett, you went to Luling High School, correct? Is that the high school that you went to? And then I believe you went to Southwest Texas State, which is now Texas State University. And you've been there, I think you'll be starting your 32nd year at Luling. So that's a long time for a coach and a teacher to be at one institution. What's the secret or what's the reason why Luling? And I'm sure you've had opportunities to go to other places, given your track record. So what makes Luling special to you? And tell us a little bit about Luling itself. Luling is 50 miles due south of Austin, Texas, just for locations purposes. But give us a little insight on the town Luling and why that school is a place that you feel you wanted to build a team.

Well, I graduated from there in 81, went off to school and decided that I would pursue the teaching and coaching route. I had no inclination or plans to go back home. That wasn't really what I had considered. But a job opened up just as I was graduating, and one of my former coaches was the AD at the time and called me and asked me if I'd be interested in coming back. And the position was exactly what I could feel as a teacher. So I thought, well, what the heck? You know, I'll do five years, get my feet wet, and then I'll be out of there. So I didn't plan on going home. That wasn't in the cards. And so I signed on, and five years has quickly turned into 31, going on 32. And like you said, I've had some really good offers. There's several things that keep me there. One, it's home. My parents are still alive and they're still there. And every time I considered leaving, interviewed, got job offers, I'd go visit a place and try to get a feel for it. And I just knew in my heart that it wasn't where I belonged and that I needed to stay for whatever reason. So I stayed. And it's been a good decision so far.

So tell us a little bit about what size is Luling? What size town is it? And then maybe give folks a little bit of an idea. Many of our listeners are becoming track fans, but they certainly don't know probably a whole lot about the A system at Texas high schools and maybe the size of your school and how that puts you in the context of other places.

Sure. We've got a population of about 5, 000. Our high school population is right at 400. We're just under 400. Luling is a poor town, if you want to classify a town. We've got over 60% of our kids on free and reduced lunches. We struggle with the state testing. We're just right at the line all the time. We're not a Westlake. We're not a Lake Travis. The kids depend on the educators to help them get where they need to be as opposed to some places kids are going to get in spite of the teacher. So we've got Blue Collar. Everybody thinks about the oil business there, but only a few people actually own the oil wells and the oil that comes out of the ground. Most everybody else is a support crew to help those things keep running and or their ag. It's an ag-based community. So the school itself, we've had incredible results in track and field. We've got a national record holder that came out of there, Gatorade National High School Athlete of the Year. We've had five All-Americans, meaning they were top five in their event for the nation. We've had four girls jump 19.6 or longer in the long jump in the last 25. Years. We've had a 24-10 jumper, a 25-foot jumper, a 23-6 jumper, a 22-6 jumper. We've had some 16-foot pole vaulters. I mean, those marks stand up in any classification. We're a class 3A school, so we're definitely a small school. We're down on the smaller end of the schools. But with our cross program, we compete against everybody. So when we get a chance, we're going to run in the big school divisions each week.

And your cross country teams have won seven straight titles last year, as Steve told me, to very little fanfare. It's not something you read about in the papers. You probably aren't seeing it on FlowTrack or Let's Run. So tell us about how you got started as a runner and then how that progressed to a coaching career to have the success you've had.

I can remember as far back as being five years old in kindergarten, and before we could go to the black top and play dodgeball, you had to run about 75 meters to get to the black top from the sidewalk, and the teacher would line us all up on the sidewalk and then say, go. And it was my mission in life to never lose that race to the black top. And so, I've been racing something my entire life, and my brother and I used to run around the house and time it, and we would keep track of our top 10 times ever. And we would have a start and finish time. We would literally run around the brick house and time it and write it down on a sheet of paper. If it was a foot race, I wanted to be in it because I thought I could win it. And I've been that way pretty much my whole life. And so I started racing, and I thought I was a sprinter. And then as I was growing up, I played all the sports, but I found out my dad ran the mile in high school back in Luling High School. He graduated in 1961. And I found out that he had run like a 444 mile back in 1960, 61, which is pretty solid. He didn't even have a track back then. So they'd run on a path underneath the stands. And I thought, well, I can beat that. You know, I'll wind up. And I just, when I got into seventh grade track, I'd played all the sports. I played football, baseball, basketball, all of it. But when I got into seventh grade track, I can remember my junior high track coach getting us all together and asking us, what did we want to run? And so he said, how many of you want to run the 100? And who wants to run the 100? So I raised my hand. And then he said, who wants to run the 200? I raised my hand. He said, who wants to run the 400? I raised my hand. And he goes, Barnett, you can only do two or three events. And I could not believe it. I was like, you're kidding. I was like, I was going to run all of them. I was going to do every event. I thought you could run them all. I had no clue. And so I said, well, whatever, coach. So he put me on the sprint relay leadoff leg and the 1320, which was a three lapper back in the day. That's as far as you can run. And I did pretty good. My first track meet. And there's something about that that just lit a spark in me. And then when I got into high school, I had a high school coach that really took a lot of interest in me and gave me all his Runners World magazines and Running Times magazines. And that's the only access you had to anything running back in the day, you know, and I read them cover to cover. I read the ads, the copyright, I mean everything. I knew every magazine cover to cover. And he started me out running 15 minutes a day and said, see if you can go farther each day, you know, run 15 minutes and see if you can go a little farther. And something about that, the individuality of it, I had friends that began to kind of choose a different path and they were kind of into the party scene and they were on my football team. And I thought, you know, I don't have much control over what those guys go do, and I got to depend on them as teammates, but I have complete control over my running. And no one can screw that up except me. And something about that just really connected with me. It sparked me, and I just took off from there. And so I've been running my whole life, and then after my sophomore year, I just decided I'm just going to run. And I went, and that's a tough decision in a small school, because football coaches were on my case about, you know, you're going to be the starting defensive back, you're going to be the starting half back. And I'm like, yeah, but there's not much need at college level for 145-pound DB, you know? So I just kind of went straight running. My parents were struggling to make ends meet. I wanted to go to school, and I thought I could get some help and help them out financially by running. And so I just went at it, you know, and it became pretty important.

So in high school, tell us a little bit about your high school career. Did you, you ran cross and track?

Ran cross and track. We started the cross program my sophomore year.

So you've been there since the very beginning.

Yeah, well, my dad ran a little cross back in his day, and it went, you know, it went under.

It went dark.

There was no cross until I came along, and I had a coach who understood it, knew the importance of it for track. And so we started a cross program my sophomore year, and I was able to run at the state meet. My junior and senior year. And back then, it was two divisions. It was the big schools and then all the other divisions. So it was 5A by themselves, and then it was 4A, 3A, 2A, 1A together. So I qualified to state my junior and senior year in cross and then also in class, what was 2A then, in track in the mile my junior and senior year.

And what were your high school PRs in the mile?

158.5 and 420 in the mile.

So you did run faster than your dad in high school?

Oh yeah, I smoked him. Yeah.

You probably never heard the end of that.

Yeah, we don't bring that up anymore.

You know, Coach, you and I were reading the same magazines at the same time. I'm about nine years, seven years younger than you are, but my dad was feeding me runner's worlds and the runner and track and field news. I was devouring it all, all of a piece. You know, when we talk about running shoes these days and people talk about legacy shoes and everything else, I'm like, yeah, you don't really know. You don't really, really know. Yeah. But yeah, so one thing I wanted to ask you about, tell us a little bit about, you've been coaching now for 31 years, and every coach usually has a sort of a coach that got them into coaching, or it's very rare that you find someone who has a facility at coaching who didn't have someone sort of show them the way. Tell us a little bit about maybe one or two of the most impactful coaches that you had, or if there wasn't an impactful coach, how you got into this crazy passion slash job of coaching?

Like I said, my high school coach was JB Mitchell. He ran collegiately at Baylor. I'm pretty sure that's where he ran, and he did a little bit of coaching around and was at Travis High School here in Austin and then came to Luling as I was getting ready to enter ninth grade. And he was our JV freshman football coach, and I was playing football at the time, and he was just going around and saying, hey, we're going to start a cross-country program, and no one had a clue what cross-country was. And he started explaining it, and I was like, man, that's right up my alley. I mean, I live 12 miles out in the country and ran around out there all the time. I thought, oh, that'd be cool. Just run around the pasture, you know, just whatever. I'm good at this. So that's where it started. He gave me a watch that actually had a second hand on it. There weren't any of these digital things. It was just like a Timex with a little on it. And he said, go over to the track and see how far you can run in 15 minutes. And I did that every day after football practice. I'd go over and run 15 minutes. And took me and about six other kids to our first meet. And I was like, this is pretty cool. And he just took a real interest in me personally. He's like a second dad almost. And just kept feeding me those magazines and just encouraging me and sparkled it for me. And so he was very influential. Had a lot to do with it. And then just the sport itself kind of took control and just the fun of it, putting yourself through the training and seeing the results. I'd say on a personal one-to-one level, it's him for sure. Hands down, not even a debate.

We've kind of gotten a little bit ahead of ourselves on one thing. I did want to make sure our listeners are mostly adult road runners. Give us a short little distillation of what the heck cross-country is. Many of them may have an idea of it. Some of them may even run it in school. But I think there will be a decent number of listeners who came at this sport in their 30s and 40s and may not even have an idea of what cross-country is. Give us a little distillation of what it is in comparison to, say, road racing or track.

Well, cross-country to me is maybe the most beautiful sport out there as far as what an individual can do but also what a team can do. So the individual is not held back if he has a poor team. And the team that's made up of a bunch of individuals who are hungry can really experience a team concept. And so it's basically in high school and college, you run seven guys or seven girls over whatever the distance of the course is going to be, 5K and a lot of K for high school kids. But you can run seven athletes, and your first five athletes count for your team score. And so wherever they place in the race is their point total. You take their point total and add up the five, the other four, and you get your total score, and the lowest score wins. And so the ultimate is to have a team finish first, second, third, fourth, fifth, and score 15 points. That's the lowest you can score in XC, and it's very rarely ever done. But anything under 50 is going to win most meets, and that means you've got five girls or five guys that have done extremely well, and they've all run up near the front of the race. And so the team concept of XC is just absolutely awesome, powerful, and it's enticing to kids. They want to be a part of something where they are counted on.

It is incredibly unique in the fact that you have still an individual sport. While you're not, and I always use the basketball analogy of the thing that crushes your soul, you've played the best basketball. I don't know if you watched the NBA Finals last night, but literally an incredible game where Kyrie Irvin and LeBron James did literally every single thing they could possibly do, and they still lose. Or when I was in high school, I remember, I'll never forget, it was in junior high, I played an incredible game, and somebody missed a free throw when we lost. And in cross country, that can happen in a sense, but it doesn't happen all at once where everybody's watching it. Every athlete gets to run their own race, and their own race to the best of their ability creates the score that you get. So it's a little less of that sort of, there's a winner, there's a loser. Somebody's actually like, you lose, right? It's more along the lines of, did you really give your best? And if you lose by a point, which I'm sure you've done, have had happen a few times, you know, you're looking for every, each athlete is looking for one second they could have gone faster. Each, the coach is looking where they might have been able to do things differently. So such a really cool sport. And one that I think that, I mean, I do think cross country is one of the most participated in sports in the country. I think soccer overcame it relatively recently, but it was one of the most heavily participated in sports at the high school level. But yet, it seems like so few people really understand it or get it.

The other thing about cross country is that every runner matters, not just the fast ones on your team. That fifth runner can matter as much or even more than the first runner, and that runner needs to beat everyone around them as much as that person running up front.

And six and seven actually matter too, because they can what we call displace. So if you have a sixth or seventh runner in front of somebody else's third, fourth or fifth runner, they push those other guys back while their points don't count for their team. They just added one more point on the other team by them displacing it. So every kid knows that they are important. There's not at a point where, oh, I won't count at all, I'm out. They still matter.

Well, in Luling, we call the sixth and seventh run, we call them pushers. They're trying to push the score on the other team, and the goal is to be the best sixth and or seventh runner in the entire state of Texas, regardless of class, but especially class three, because that's where we compete. One of the things we say all the time is everybody counts, everybody matters, everybody's important.

Yeah, it's cool.

Absolutely. Even your alternates, eight, nine, ten, need to be able to step in on a day and contribute to the good of the team.

So talk about that. You've won seven straight cross-country titles from what I understand, largely due to a good team concept. You've had some great individual runners, but you don't rely on that. So in addition to the points you just made, how do you really drive the team concept home?

Well, I think maybe what makes us maybe a little different than maybe some programs is that I individualize the team. I don't team the individuals. And so every runner on every day of training has an individualized training distance, training time, based on their current fitness level and where they're potentially able to go. And so on a daily basis, they are striving towards meeting that individual goal. And in the process of all of them doing that, the team naturally gets better. And so it's not one of those deals where we get together and say, hey, we're going to run for 50 minutes, and you guys are going to run in a pack. And then when we get back, we'll hold hands, sing kumbaya, and grow some hot dogs. We're not doing that. So I think that makes us a little different than maybe your average team in the state or even the country, that every single day, including this morning, every kid had an individualized training goal for today's run. And when each kid or athlete begins to achieve that individual goal on a daily basis, then that individual is achieving what they potentially can achieve. And then the rest of them are doing that. You get pretty good. And you become pretty tough to beat. And I think that's probably part of the magic. Magic, if you will. Or the secret.

We talk about magic a lot on this podcast.

I'm a big fan of magic. I love reindeer milk. We drink a lot of it.

So with that, though, how do you ensure that they're still being pushed? Because one of the benefits of running in a pack is that sometimes those around you can get more out of you. So in the context of an individual workout plan like that, how do you make sure everybody's getting the most out of their day?

Well, for instance, I gave you just an example. If I've got a kid who can run a 508 mile, that's his current best mile, and I've got a kid who's running a 608 mile, those two kids are completely different. So when we do, say, a tempo run, the 508 mile kid is going to try to run somewhere around 6-minute pace on a tempo run, whereas the 608 kid is going to try to run somewhere around 7-minute pace. And so if the 608 kid can achieve the 7-minute pace, then he has been challenged and he has met his current ability, along with the kid who can run a 508. He runs 6-minute pace. They've both achieved the exact same thing. It's just they're a minute apart.

Do they know that?

They do know that. They know straight up that that's what I'm capable of doing, and then they go chase it. And so as they chase it and are able to put more and more miles together at that pace, they automatically improve. And so the only time that we'll ever run together in a pack is maybe on a long run. And even the long runs for us have certain time parameters. And so some of them will run a little faster than others. It's never a jog. You know, we don't do any jogging, and we don't waste any days. There's not a single mile we run that's just, eh, let's just go run a few. You know, there's no junk miles. We don't do any junk mileage at all.

Coach, before we move too far down the road, I want to make sure that, I should have done this in the introduction. I think Chris was feeding me that way, but I wanted to immediately start asking questions. And I'm also not the guy who usually leads all that stuff, so I was a little out of my comfort zone. But I do want to give a little perspective on this. We've talked now twice about this streak of seven that you guys have set. In 2016, Texas Running, which is a website, did a sort of informal survey to sort of set up the way some of these sites will do. They'll just say, let's get up the top 10 boys cross-country programs in the state. And in 2016, they did that list, and Luling came up sixth on that list. You had won sixth straight. Some of the other teams on that list, obviously, number one was the Woodlands, who I don't think anyone would ever be able to say in any other way, shape, or form that they're not the number one team in the state over a more historical perspective, and even in a current perspective. The way that they won the state championship meet this year, with darn near what some people would call nobody, they actually Luling the state meet, didn't they? But I also look on that list, and there's Boy's Ranch, who has an incredible history. There's also A&M Consolidated, who in the 70s had a great history. But the other team on there that was on that list that was just ahead of you was Kingwood. As a historian of the sport, as well as being in it for a long time, tell folks a little bit about what the streak meant in terms of the team that you were sort of racing against to get that, that this team, we used to be humble, but Kingwood, right? And how that use, and they were a big school, they were a 5A school. How you looked at that, was it apples to apples when you looked at what your streak was? Were you competing against that team to try to get that record? Or were you more along the lines of, we're very different, we're a smaller school, there's no way to go apples to apples, or in some sense, was there any chasing Kingwood? And if so, tell us a little bit about Kingwood.

Well, I watched Kingwood win six in a row. I mean, I was coaching at the state meet while they were doing it. I had individuals there and teams there as they were setting the state record with six, and I can remember the sixth one, and I thought, you know, that is truly a great program, because over a six-year period, the kids that helped you win four, they're gone. And so that means new blood had to come through in order to continue.

And they had two brothers, twin brothers, who were incredible.

Who went to Stanford and were the best collegiates ever, the best high school kids ever.

Right, and their third kid was really good, too. Yeah, he was. Three or four D1 kids. But they continued to win even when those kids were gone. And so I thought, that's a record that will probably never be touched. It's hard to win, period. And it's hard to win one. We won our first one in 1999, and then we went 11 years before we won another one. So they're really, really hard to win. And everything's got to go right, you know, whatever. And a couple of those we won, the streak as it's going right now, a couple of those we won with six kids in high school. That's it. I had six boys. There were no others. None. That was it. So it's like telling the football coach, you got 11, win a state championship. You got 11 kids. These are the ones that showed up, win with them. That's what we did. Essentially, that's what we did.

Yeah, I can give a little perspective there. I was, I had graduated. I was from high school, and I had run in college. I was running in college. I was just getting out of college when Kingwood started their streak. I coached Adam Daly, who was head to head racing against the Hauser brothers, back and forth and back and forth. So I got to watch those teams get started, and I was paying pretty close attention. And that was a big team. They were deep. They had a lot of guys on that team. I mean, they were farming from the junior high. They were creating a culture of size. And, you know, the coach there, incredibly good coach, but certainly was looking at, I won't use it, abuse is not the right term to say, because he was an incredibly good coach, but it was certainly more along the lines of, I've got a lot of kids. Let's do what we need to do to get where we need to do, which is a luxury with 400 students in your school and six kids coming out for your cross-country team. You don't have that luxury.

I don't. And so you ask, were we chasing the streak? In the minds of people who followed the sport, we're chasing the streak. And that was a big deal. Everybody started talking about, hey, Luling could break the streak. In my mind, we were chasing individual excellence with every kid in the program. And in the process of that, the streak comes as a byproduct. And so in my mind, we weren't necessarily chasing the streak. We were just running.

But Coach, I'm going to call a bullshit on that. And this is why I'm going to call bullshit on it.

Is that going to be an E on the podcast now?

Yeah, yes. It took magic to do that. Right? You know that. That makes it seem like, oh, you know, it makes it seem a little bit, we are going to eat hot dogs and sing kumbaya. Right? The way you say it, it kind of sounds that way. But I know, I can only imagine what you're thinking, wondering if you're going to get out of the district meet because somebody doesn't get their grades for that six week, for that cycles.

We have that issue.

Right? Or somebody's going to, somebody turned an ankle, and how are you going to get them there? We have that issue. Somebody's got to work, somebody's dad said, I got to pull you out. You got to work in the fields today. We got stuff for you to do.

We've had that issue.

So, and that's not happening at Kingwood. That's not happening at the Woodlands.

Well, I was going to continue. The streak is the street. But it really hasn't been so much about chasing the street. It's been, can we be as good as we can be with this 6 or this 7 or this 8? Now, if you want to compare apples to apples, now let's talk, okay? So, 7 by Luling, I'll just put it out there, is a far greater accomplishment than 6 by Kingwood.

I agree.

In my opinion, and I'm just a 54-year-old potato farmer down in Luling, but in my opinion, if I'm Southlake, or if I'm Woodlands, or if I'm Kingwood, arguably the three best over the long haul programs who have over 100 kids every year, I'm thinking those programs are more readily poised to win 6, 7, 8 in a row than a place called Luling, Texas, just because of the numbers game and the genetics. So you're talking genetic pool, number one, and you're talking numbers, number two. So in that respect, the streak is extremely special, I think historic. I think 7 in a row at a place like Luling is comparable to anything else.

No, I have you number two. In my opinion, you're the second. What Luling's boys have been able to do, what Coach Barnett, what you've been able to do, I don't think, I just think 19 straight, I mean, not 19 straight, but 19 state championships. And what Woodlands has been able to do, the culture they've been able to create there is just amazing. But I will tell you, those coaches and all those other pundits in the state who could argue with you a little bit of, they're racing each other, so even within the school, even within Conroe, right? I'm a really good friend with Coach Gibson, Mike Gibson, and he's the coach at the Woodlands' rival school. They're literally arm wrestling over which kids are going to go to their school. They're racing each other at the state meet and at the district meet and at the region meet, but they're facing equals and someone could argue maybe you're not. Now, I know a lot more. I've been a coach at a high school level for just a little bit of time. Actually, I coached in the same district that you did. We coached against each other for one short fall. You stomped me, which was not that it was hard. I was at Edna High School, so it was not very hard. But I do believe that what you guys have accomplished is something of a magnitude that's significantly greater than what you saw at Kingwood. But can you give a little bit more credence to what struggles you're dealing with beyond just the numbers issue, but sort of the way that the new, how quick a culture can get built up but not sustained, right? It's easy for, it's not easy, but it could be relatively quick that a coach could come in and get some energy for a year, but not for year after year after year.

You're talking about the struggles at a place?

Why six straight at a 3A school?

Or seven straight.

Seven straight, excuse me, yes. Or maybe eight, and maybe nine. Maybe.

We'll see. Who knows?

Who knows? That's right.

Why? Well, I went to a level one USA track and field school back when I was a young coach. And I recall, and then I went to level two out at BYU. And then I went to level three up in Dallas. And at level three, it was Robert Vaughn, Peter Schnell, Brooks Johnson and Jack Daniels. Those were the presenters, okay? At every school, level one, level two, level three, every one of them emphasized the importance of philosophy. You know, some kind of philosophy. And then I ran into a guy that I used the current system with, and he talked to philosophy. And all I wanted was, all I wanted was, give me the frickin' workouts. I get kids to do them. Just give me the goddamn workouts, okay? I need the silver bullet. And that's what all coaches are looking for. I looked for it for years.

Yeah, you grew up in the 80s.

I did.

You were dressed in the 80s. That's how it all was in the 80s.

I was looking for, man, I'd call Danny Green, and he'd lie to me about what they were doing. And I was on the phone weekly with Jack Daniels. I tracked him down at Courtland University when he was up in New York, and he would give me an hour of his time every Wednesday. And I had notepads full of stuff. And then I started tracking down Vigil, I'd call him, read his book, read all the littyard stuff, and it's all, it's just everywhere. It's not in one. No, it's not. It's just everywhere. It's like nine different pieces you could read on that guy, and it's different. And so, man, I was after it. I was like, when everybody else was out partying, you know, Wednesday night, Thursday night, I'm at home on the floor figuring stuff out, and I'm calling people and just like almost obsessed. I'm going to figure this out, right? So long story short, it came down to what I heard early in my career. It's philosophy. Philosophy drives everything, and philosophy is everything. It's what's behind all great companies. It's what's behind all great institutions. It's what's behind all great teams. You look at San Antonio Spurs. That may never be matched in the history of professional sports again, what they've been able to do. It all starts with a philosophy. And so when I sat down and finally said, you know, I need to come up with something that is going to be easy to remember. I want the kids to know it, not me. If somebody asks the kids, they need to be able to repeat it. It does no good if the coach has it and the kids don't. So kids know what the philosophy is in Luling, and that's what drives the boat. And it's all about that. We come back to that whenever, you know, there's some sort of whatever, we come back to that. So that's what drives it.

Let's talk about your philosophy. That's the perfect segue. You've got it on your water bottle there on the backside. The Pabu system.

Yeah.

So what are the foundational principles to your philosophy?

Our philosophy at Luling is real simple. It's excellence, which then it becomes individual excellence, and the words thrown around a lot, excellence. It's never defined. And so we define it for the kids. I define it for them. And excellence is basically a quality effort against a quality standard. And so you learn what the standards are, you learn what the demands are for your sport, and you find out where you're at as an individual, and you begin to chase your individual ability along with knowing what the state meet landmarks are. What does the kid need to run the mile in in order to be able to be a potential state qualifier? What does the kid need to be able to run the mile in in order to be maybe on the medal stand top ten? And then you start to design your training around those benchmarks, if you will, and so you're constantly taking samples along the way to find out what the fitness levels are, and then you just modify the training to allow the kid to be able to go there. But you put that out in front of them. You don't keep that in as a coach.

You give them measuring sticks.

You give them measuring sticks so they can measure themselves, and then you help them understand that as a team, you know, seven guys, seven girls, whatever, you all need to be able to run the mile this fast, and then you need to be able to run tempo runs this fast in order to get the higher end aerobic stuff so that you can then carry that over a 5K course. And so if you can run that time, you got a chance to be on the medal stand. But the philosophy is excellence, and that's against a landmark or a benchmark or a measuring stick. And so as they achieve those things daily in practice, they get closer and closer to not only achieving individual excellence, but then getting closer and closer to the landmarks that will allow them to compete at the state meet.

That idea of excellence, Coach, we do still have to put pen to paper. We still have to make macro cycles, big picture ideas of what we're going to try to get accomplished in a season. And then you're going to break that down within your races to maybe a weekly training protocol or micro cycles that are two weeks long with a one week break. There's a lot of different ways of doing that. Can you give us kind of an idea of what that idea of excellence, how that plays out with the way that you build your athletes' structure from a summer and then what you're doing going into a cross country season? And if there's any significant difference, maybe what you might do for a miler or two miler in the track season. So give us kind of an idea there, and then we'll talk to a little bit more. We'll try to pin you down a little bit on the pavo system, not to crucify you or anything else, because we're philosophically on a different position. But I do want to hear, we definitely are probably going to agree on the way that you make a plan and how you make a plan and what points you're trying to get accomplished and how that looks. So anyway, if you can give us a little bit, that was a really big question, but maybe break it down any way that you want to.

Summertime, let's talk there, because that's where we're at. We focus on what most everybody else focuses on. We try to build a base, get to a certain level of mileage based on the kid's ability to do the mileage and recover.

Do you have maximums, minimums?

I pretty much let a kid do whatever they can handle. So if they can run a lot of mileage and they're able to recover and not show any ill effects, where they're slipping as far as being able to run certain runs and stuff, I let them go wherever that physical age limit is. They all have them. And so even the mileage levels is individualized. I don't tell the kids, hey, we're going to stop at 40. Everybody's going to run 40 miles a week, and that's it. If you do anything other than that, you're gone. That's not in the vocabulary. So we attempt to build summer base mileage, and we stay, we do some time trials throughout the summer just to kind of see where we're at. We also do a long run, you know, every week. We do some tempo work based on their current mile fitness.

What's a long run for your high schoolers in the summer?

Anywhere from, my top kids, if we're going to talk about them, they're all at different levels, but my top kids will go anywhere from 9 to 15, depending on where they're at. And then so we'll do some tempo stuff during the week, and we're usually striding a couple of times a week after tempo runs usually. And so we'll do some hundreds or some two hundreds, and that's kind of the emphasis is to build a really good aerobic base, a really strong aerobic base, and try to push that system, you know, develop it as the summer goes so that they're able to run faster than other people with oxygen primarily.

And you do teach biology and pretty much exercise physiology for high school kids, right?

Yeah, it's anatomy.

Yeah, anatomy. So you know what you're talking about when you're talking about that stuff.

Yeah, I try to.

So then you get into the season, cross season starts pretty early once school starts. How does it change from there as you start to get to more race-specific work?

Well, I'll take a look at what the kids are doing on their tempo runs, and that's using an indicator of whether or not they're beginning to have what I call conversion in training. And once a kid is able to run near their set potential on tempo runs, we'll transition into a little faster aerobic work right at that aerobic anaerobic line, and we'll start to transition into some interval work that's done right at that transition line where they begin to produce lactate. But I want them to stay on the aerobic side and maximize that part because that's, you know, 5K, you're running pretty much aerobically the whole way. As they begin to show some recovery with the aerobic intervals, the higher level intervals, and they're able to start recovering quicker, pulse coming down, and they're able to link those together, then we'll start transitioning into some lactic acid. We'll actually do some, quote, speed work. But that's predicated on them showing recovery at the higher end with the aerobic intervals. But we won't do that. We won't transition into just, quote, speed work because we're close to some big race or something.

You're looking at physiological milestones.

I'm looking at physiological milestones, and as I see those, then that tells me their body is ready for the next tool, if you will, to put in the quiver. And until then, we stay away from it. So I'm looking at every kid, and I'm looking for an adaptation of some kind before we begin to add something else. And that's worked pretty well for us.

So can you give us a generalized idea of what PAVO is, or are you willing to do that? I know there's a sort of secret society and a special handshake.

I'm not sure where all that stuff comes from.

I know you really well, Coach, and I know you're not part of all that, but I do know you implement a program that you're a proud PAVO school. And so there's a lot of misinformation about that. And just to give all of our listeners a little bit of a heads up, in really early 70s, there was a couple of guys that got together and saw that they could get some pretty good team results through a different sort of creating a plan that fit a model that was not necessarily something discussed physiologically. It was based on physiology, but it was more along creating teams and making team work, work in a physiological sense. This is a vast generalization, which was in the 70s a very different thing from just big miles. And then in the 80s, people did big intensity, big hard quality workouts, and the Pablo system, as I understand, it was really aerobically based, but also had a lot of threshold work. Seemingly, what I understand about the basic Pablo system is extremely threshold based. And then culminating in, but really always focused on a team element in a way that's a little bit different than a lot of other programs I understand. I haven't gone to any of the classes or any of the talks about what Pablo is. Can you give folks just a basic idea of what that might mean? And then maybe a little bit more specific how that fits into what you just discussed with us.

Well, I think I'll start with this. The term Pablo is not... The term Pablo is just a name for something. It's a name that was coined in order... It's not Paavo Nermi's training. And so there's this misconception...

That would be just straight fart like all the time.

Absolutely. Or whatever he did. The term Pablo comes from the admiration of the spirit of Paavo Nermi. That Paavo Nermi really sought excellence. He really tried to be the best. He timed his runs. He chased trolley cars. He regretted when he got older that he didn't run twice a day. He'd walk in the morning and run in the afternoons. The name of the quote said system is derived from just his mentality as an athlete. It's kind of that mindset that has been tagged to the training system. I think that's one misconception. Some people think they're just doing Paavo Nermi training. Not at all, not even close. What was your second question on that?

Basically, what you're using, what is it, then, generally, because in most training systems, you can point to, we're focusing on this piece, or at this piece at this time. And I think Paavo must be doing some things at some times, generally.

Always.

And so, what are those? And then, really, do you tweak it, or how do you use it? Or is Paavo really sort of a, this is an ethos, this is sort of, we're all underneath, this is sort of a spriticorps of what this push for excellence is. And then every single program is doing very large variations on that. Because South Lake Carroll, as I know, is a Paavo-based system, has been for a long, long time. But I also know the coach there is, as he inherited a program he grew up in, basically, he made subtle changes, made changes to the program, and it's different than it was at the beginning. I'm sure your system, when you decided to implement a Paavo-based system, you then made adjustments as you went along. So basically, what are the sort of the physiological principles, and then how do you manipulate it, mess with it to get what you're trying to get and the results that you got to the success that you have?

Well, I think I have to go back a little bit to maybe make it make sense. But like I told you guys, I was after the cheese. I was the mouse after the cheese, so to speak. And I was trying to really understand why my kids perform the way they do and how to put them in the best place possible when it mattered. And we were successful before I even started doing the system. We've been second, third, fifth. You know, we've been the state meat every year since 91.

Yeah, I failed to tell the listeners that, but that's a pretty incredible streak.

We've been state ranked every year since 91, and we've been at the state meat every year since 93. So we've been decent for a long time. And when I ran into this stuff, it just answered a lot of questions for me. And so it's very pragmatic. You do this to get this. It's physiologically sound. It's good on incremental volumes so that kids stay healthy. They're able to adapt. It gives you benchmarks and physiological markers, like you said, so that you'll know and understand this is now time, or you'll know how to troubleshoot. So if a kid gets injured, he gets sick, this is what we go to now so we're not wasting time getting you back to a fitness level that's going to be relevant when you need it.

Limits variables? Is that a fair way to say it?

It limits variables, but it's extremely flexible. So you're always waiting for the day's training to take place to give you an indicator of what needs to happen next. So you don't just arbitrarily boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, that's it. Recovery did not take place on that run, we need another day. So the recovery element that's built into it is really sweet so that you know whether or not your kid or your athlete is recovering, so that you know now to apply the next training tool. So that appeals to me as a coach. I don't want to waste a kid's time with kind of guessing. It takes a lot of guesswork out. It becomes highly specific down to the tenth of a second, even on speed factors. The girl that set the national record in the triple jump, I trained her on the speed side of it with this. I had a girl, Paul Vaulter, go 13 feet. I trained her with this stuff, but it was on the speed side of it. You know, we flipped things around a little bit. So that's... It just connected with me when I went to a clinic and began to see... You know, it's like I'd been looking for this something for a long time, and I got a couple of pieces of paper stuck down in my face, and I said, you know what? That's pretty dang good right there. A lot of people out in the internet world have very, very strong opinions about what we and others do. I find that most of those folks have never been to a clinic nor a camp. They've never really taken the time to learn, and so we're demonizing, and we're criticizing something we haven't really taken the time to learn, which is really unfortunate. But here's what I'm good with. I tell coaches all the time, I think you should do what you feel comfortable with, and I think you should do what you feel is best for your athletes, and I am completely okay with what anybody does on a training level where there's collegiate, high school, post-collegiate. I really don't care. And all I ask is that people are okay with what I do, because...

But I tell you, Coach, every coach I've ever asked about what they do in a system that's Pavo-based, they always do what you just did, which is talk about... And this is not a... I'm not criticizing you. I'm just saying they must have a special portion of this when they teach it to coaches on how to make it really smoke... make it smoke in mirrors, so you can't really tell what the heck's going on.

There's no smoke in mirrors.

You're obfuscating and creating a giant pile of smoke in the room where we can't really tell exactly what...

There's no smoke in mirrors. We just show up and kick people's ass.

Yeah, there's a veil of secrecy, let's just say that.

There's no secrecy. So I'll tell you what we're doing this week.

Okay, go ahead.

Okay, so is that what you're wanting?

No, really what I want is a bigger picture, but we're probably not going to get there today. I'll have to go to a clinic.

Here's a question. You said earlier no junk miles.

Right.

Sometimes I hear that and I think of somebody that might be in a system that's quality focused, right? But you've also talked about recovery and base miles, so now I interpret that comment a little bit differently, which is that every run has a purpose.

Correct.

There is no run where we aren't specifically trying to achieve a purpose. We might be running easy.

Correct.

But that's because that's the purpose for that day.

Correct. But the easy run even has a time parameter. So it's not, hey, we're going to go out and do an easy seven. It's we're going to run seven at this pace. So the recovery run even has a pace element to it.

Is that specific or a range?

It's a range. It's pretty specific, but there is a range. So you're looking at a recovery run of, say, 45 seconds to a minute slower than the previous day's tempo run. So let's say you go out and you run four miles at six-minute pace. Then you're going to come back and run your recovery run at, say, six, 45, seven-minute pace. And I've talked to Vigil about this personally on the side in private. And he's like, Coach, you're so fricking right on. He said, everybody in this country runs too damn slow. He said, you nailed it. And he said, nobody wants to talk about it, nobody wants to say it, because nobody wants to go through the fire and do what's necessary. He said, and I presented at the Woodlands. I presented this stuff at the Woodlands. I stood right up in front of a bunch of coaches, and I presented this stuff in front of Danny Green and everybody in God. And Vigil's sitting right there on the front row. When I get through, he goes, come here. And he said, spot on, nailed it. So Vigil's one of my heroes. I mean, I'm a big Vigil fan. I love Joe Vigil. I've read his book. You know, I got it, and he signed the copy of it. And Vigil's about as close as it gets to getting it right. As far as I'm concerned, out there in the coaching world, I think he's, you know, I think...

No, I agree, Coach. And I just know that people who follow Coach Vigil's program, they, it is extremely difficult. It is a high-volume, high-intensity program. Again, physiologically based, based on his background as an exercise physiologist.

Exactly.

And, but now he did coach at a university, you know, Adam State, where for many years they had, they had dozens and dozens and dozens of kids there, right? So they had 30, 40, 50 people on a team.

Right.

So he didn't do the same kind of specific, each person. He would test them all, but he wouldn't be able to implement a range and a set protocol for each one of these different runs that you're trying to get in. And one of the benefits of being in a smaller school is you, and you have that ability to really know with your 8 to 10 to 12 to 14 kids and one on the male side and on the female side, really where they're at and how they're functioning. And I imagine most of your success comes from that individualization, plus your heart, because everyone that knows you, knows you care for them. And any athlete that runs for a coach that knows they care, that is real magic there. And Coach Vigil did that as well. Coach Vigil is a master at not talking to you for four days or five days and then at just the right moment saying just the right thing before you even knew that it needed to happen. I guess one of the questions I have for you is, talk just a little bit about in your experience about the difference between men and women in your experience with boys and girls at the high school level as you're coaching. I get that asked frequently. When I coach collegiately, how did I adjust differently for men and women? I'm interested in how you do that and what sort of approaches you might take. Is there a difference? Is it age-based? Is it culturally-based? Is it small school, big school? What are the differences that you're seeing between that and are there? And how do you adjust that for training and the results you're trying to get out of your athletes?

I think there's a number of differences. It depends. A girl at Kingwood who's running XC versus a girl at Luling who's running XC come from two completely different backgrounds and expectations. I find that boys are just by nature more competitive. Girls are more social. So guys will come out and run even if they're the only one running. It's very rare that a girl will come out and run if she's the only one running. They want to have the quote team thing and all that. The ability, their physiology is different. Muscle mass is different. Their ability to handle mileage is different. Our girls are going to run lower mileage than our guys. They just are. And I progress them at a different rate than I do the guys. They'll stay at a place a little longer. And when they do bump, it's at a lower level, not as many miles when we do bump the mileage. And so all that's taken to account. But we've been on camp a number of years with the Carroll kids, the girls and the guys. And again, like I said, the Carroll girls come from a different environment, and the expectation is different compared to a girl in Luling who's helping raise their brothers and sisters because it's a single mom.

You're talking about mom and dad issues. What's happening in the home?

All the time. I absolutely have to if you're in Luling. You're talking about I've got to work to help pay the bills. You don't have a chance all day to focus on running. There's other things that have to happen. I may need to work if I'm in Luling. I may not have the luxury of going home and taking a nap after my hard workout. I may need to go and help mom with the business, or I'm going to watch the kids. Mom's going to work. It's a different culture. And so you have to take all that into account when you're dealing with girls. And a lot of it depends on where they're at, where they grow up, and whether there's mom and dad, and whether there's expectation of education. And I've got a lot of kids who, when they go to college, they're the first. And nobody in the family's ever gone. They're the first. So it's just a different deal.

Let's talk about the mental side of things. It's hard to get high school kids motivated and to strive for the excellence that you're talking about. How do you drive home that culture?

Well, it starts again with defining what excellence is for them as a runner. And then you then have to begin to talk about motivation and talk about, you know, we define what motivation is. And so if I'm a kid and I'm coming into the program, Coach Barnett's going to tell me that first you're going to start and run a mile a day in front of me, show me you can do it, and you're going to complete it and you're going to write it down, show it to me, because you log your, you know, log your training, it becomes kind of intrinsically fun to see what you're doing. But, you know, we'll start there with every kid. You run a mile a day. And we teach the philosophy of individual excellence, and we talk about motivation. Those are two big, big things that we talk about, and we come back and revisit them pretty often. And the idea that a motivated person will do things on their own and alone if necessary, motivated people, you know, don't wait on others, motivated people, you know, you just go down this list of things that motivated people do in terms of achieving individual excellence. This is what people do who achieve individual excellence, and you have to teach them that, because a lot of them may come from home where that's not ever even mentioned. The word excellence, motivation, it's new. It's like new vocabulary. And so it comes down to here's where you're at, and here's what you're capable of. Now, let's talk about why you didn't achieve what you're capable of. Is it a home situation? Is it an illness? Is it injury? Or is it fear? Let's deal with these things. It's not home, so we'll mark that off the list. You're not sick, so mark that off the list. You're not injured, you're scared. You're scared to hurt? Yeah, coach. Well, then you will never ever get better. And so here's where you're at, here's where you can go. Motivated people want to go there. They want to know what they need to do to get better. Here's what you get to do to get better. That's the mindset, and that's how we go at it. So today, for instance, we had 25 kids this morning doing a workout, and every single one of them had a goal pace for the workout. And you give them that ahead of time. They write it down. They know up front, here's what I need to do. If I can accomplish this, I know for a fact physiologically, I'm going to get better. And so they go out and they do it. And there's this sense of pride that they then take that is not generated by me or anybody else. It's generated by quality work at a standard, and they walk away feeling pretty dang good. So it's that over and over again. And so then it becomes kind of intrinsic. They can't wait to do more, or they can't wait to get to run faster. So it just kind of feeds itself.

Plus it's reinforcing. If you check the box and then you go out the next day and it's easier, you see that, hey, if I keep doing this, I'll get better.

Absolutely. The body tells you, hey, that thing I did, that's why I'm running like this right now. And so it's like, well, I get to do some more. Within reason, you don't want to go crazy because then you're overtraining. So you got to take care of the recovery stuff, but it becomes extremely motivating for kids who, one, come to you, you know, a lot of kids come to you, they don't even know in Luling. They have no clue. They just sign up. And so they're either motivated from the get-go, they were born motivated, or they want to be motivated. And you can show them this, and the ones who want to be motivated, they become motivated. And then you got the kids, they're not interested in being motivated. They don't stay very long.

Yeah, imagine they don't coach.

Their character gets tested real quick, and they realize, I ain't got what it takes, and I think I'm going to go play basketball, because I can hide out.

So, you know. You know, one quick thing I want to ask, so you just talked about stringing together the work, and one of my mentors, Bev Kearney, who I coached with at the University of Texas, she used to talk all the time about getting athletes to a certain level and doing the work, but my hands, those of you listeners, I'm basically sort of stair-stepping each piece of work that an athlete did, they would get to a certain point where they had reached the threshold of what the amount of work they could get in in a given time, but yet the race result that they were trying to achieve was some level above that. And she used to always talk about that as magic, which is sort of where I came up with, where I've been influenced by this idea of magic, and that idea of magic is you can do so much work, and your system is based on doing the work and showing the kids that they can do work. Some of that will create a little bit of magic. But to win seven straight titles, you have got to have been able to lift them above that level of the work that they've done plus the mental training that you did to plug it all together to get them to that point. There's still a gap, coach, between that and seven straight high school titles. How do you coach that? What's happening there? Can you articulate it?

Yeah, complete 100% honesty. There's no magic. There's no gap, honestly. They are racing at their training. So we train to race this fast, and we go race that fast. And there's really no magic bullet. I can take a look at their training, and I can tell you this is how fast we're going to run. And there's not a... Yes, we get to a certain level, and you run out of time, because the season ends. Well, I wish we could have got here. But we race with what we got, and with keeping in mind that we want to be at this at least to race on this day. And so we work towards that, and we try to progress deeper into training protocols if we can get there. But when we step on the line at the state meet, I can tell you what we're going to run. And we train specifically to run faster than the state meet landmarks for 3A. We try to train at 5A, 6A landmarks, and the kids know what those are. And so if you're going to be a team in 6A, a team, not the individual, but the team, now, the individual, if I got an individual is good enough, we, you know, right now we got one that possibly could be. But we look at the state meet landmarks for 3A, 4A, 5A, 6A as a team, and we chase those landmarks. And so there's no, you know, there's not a rising above to keep the streak alive or anything. This is where this team is right now, and this is what is going to run. So at state meet this year, I think we averaged 1620, which is the fastest we've ever averaged as a team. But the training said we could do even faster. So we actually, I think, ran a little below because we had an issue. Kid lost a shoe a quarter mile in the race and ran the whole frickin' race with one shoe on. Had another kid have a respiratory infection, you know. Should have been number three. He was number six. So, you know, then we go to Nike South, and we run a pretty good race down there. But I mean, I can tell you, each team, including his, this is what they're going to run today, and that's what they ran. And so it's just, we train to race, and we race to train, and the two feed each other.

The magic is in the process, Steve. I think that's what he said.

Yeah, it's awesome.

I love to hear it. The magic is in the process, and the process is what's fun. So I think you were wanting a week, like maybe something, maybe what we do in a week.

No, I don't really care, Coach.

You don't care?

I really don't care about that. I was mostly talking, we've been talking in generalizations with all of our folks in terms of what we're talking from a training protocol. We talk big picture and philosophy about all that. The things you're talking about are right in line with a good deal, a bit of the stuff that we talk about. I think that what you do that's a little different from what we do at Rogue generally, or the way that each of our coaches at Rogue gets to implement their own protocols and their own programs in the way that they choose, dealing with the individual athletes as they see them. But we generally do believe that there's way more range than you probably have in terms of pacing for easy runs and long runs and things like that. But a lot of that has to do with, as much variability that you have with your high school kids, an adult has a lot more variables. And in a marathon, it's a little bit different too, because they're facility at a 5K pace. They still have to have facility at your true tempo is, but they're running true tempo for much longer pay times. So there's other things that are in play here. We're talking mostly with marathoners. But ultimately, Coach, the things that you're talking about here are really, really interesting. I think they'll be interesting to our listeners as well.

So yeah, I got one more question, because we have to wrap it. But you talked as a kid about being that competitive kid that's running from the line to the tarmac for dodgeball.

Yeah.

What drives you as a coach today?

That's a great question. The thrill of the chase. The idea of taking kids and seeing them go from point A to point B and accomplish something that most believe to be impossible is extremely fun. And just nipping at the dog, nipping at the big dog, biting on the heels of people who are to be kicking our ass, and we're letting them know we're in the race, that is stinking fun. And I love the whole process of training. I love the daily grind of if we get this in, people better watch out. You know, I just, I think it just comes from my competitive nature. You know, I just, I always wanted to win. You know, if I was going to play something, I was going to beat you. There's checkers, you're going to lose. If it's football, I'm going to keep scoring until I'm in front, and then we quit. I mean, it's, I just, I had this intense desire to do well when I was a kid. I think I was born with it. It's still there. I've got it channeled. But I won't cross any lines to win, but I will be thinking about it while other people are sleeping. Or if I'm driving to the coast to surf, I'm thinking workouts, you know? And so what drives me to this day is still just the fun of trying to put kids in a position that they can achieve something that's really special to them, and when they're 40, they'll remember it and they'll talk about it when they're older and maybe not as in good shape, and they'll remember it as a very positive point in their life, and they can draw upon what they learned and use it in their business, use it in their home, use it in whatever they're doing.

Excellent supplies lifelong.

Yes.

Well, thank you, Coach. It's clear your passion coming through. The energy will probably come through the mic. I know we're feeling it here in person, but it's been a privilege talking to you, and it's clear that your kids are lucky to have a mentor like you in your life.

I appreciate that.

In their lives. So we thank you for sharing that with our audience. Absolutely. And for joining us here.

Thank you all for having me.

It's been a pleasure. So that's episode 26, a little bit different for our audience, but hopefully you enjoyed that. As we mixed it up, got a little deeper into the sport, we're kind of carrying them along.

That's right.

No longer apologizing for it.

Nope.

So thank you all for listening. As always, you can check us out on our website, roguerunning.com. Follow us on Instagram, Twitter or Facebook at Rogue Running. We'll talk to you next time.