Hey everybody, it is episode 105 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is Chris coming at you from Austin, Texas. Today I have two very special guests. I'm excited to interview. We're actually going to be continuing our series or discussions on trail running. And so I've got true to trail running gods of sorts in front of me here. Jason Brooks, who was on us on with me in episode 94 when we did our first episode really on the details of trail and episode number three guest now almost two years later here, Paul Terranova, the ultra running icon here from Austin, Texas. Welcome to the show, guys.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Excited to have you on. We're going to be digging in with both of you more on trail. Probably spending a little bit more time today talking about nutrition and hydration strategies for long trail events that would also be applicable to, I guess, other long endurance events. And Paul has some background in Ironman Triathlon, so we'll bring in some of that expertise as well.

I've got my water and my coffee already.

Your hydration tools are all ready.

Post run.

No pack today, but you've got double fisting there. So but of course, before we dive into that and talk about trail in more depth, we've got some current events to cover. The first is trail relevant. We don't talk a ton about trail in these intros, but I think since you guys are on, it's time to talk about it. This really isn't trail. It's more ultra focused, but certainly the athletes that were mentioned are badasses on the trail as well. But recently at the Desert Solstice 24 hour event, 12 and 24 hour event, Camille Herron, who is a ultra running goddess in that world, broke the US 24 hour record for distance, as well as the time record for 100 miles on her journey to that 24 hour record. She finished 100 miles on that day in 13 hours and 25 minutes, beating the previous record by about 20 minutes. And then she finished her distance for 24 hours was 162.9 miles in 24 hours. That was actually done on a track. So she ran 652 laps of a track to get that record. Her average pace for the entire 24 hours was 850. So 8 minutes 50 seconds for 24 hours. She beat all the men, by the way, on the day as well, both in the 24 hour and 12 hour events. She was ahead at both points. So really, really impressive from Camille. Wanted to get y'all's reactions on this. We'll start with you, Paul.

Yeah, we watched a little bit of it on the big screen at home from the computer, Meredith and I. So yeah, watching them come around the track each time and it was middle of the day and then starting to get sunset. And yeah, she just kept chugging along, and that was really good to watch and steady. She's good at those things. Yeah, she can really pull it off at those. So hats off to her.

You've met Camille, right?

Yes.

What's she like? Is she the Yoda of trail? I mean, what's her demeanor?

She is fun and quirky and bubbly and energetic, and it's always a kick to run into her. And so I think her personality really comes through on social media as well. And hater or lover, right? She's got a lot of spirit and spunk, and she's always been encouraging to me and Meredith. And so, yeah, it's fun to see her do well.

So reading the recap, it seemed like she was just pretty consistent the entire time. It sounded like she had a shoe change at one point, and then it took her... She walked a couple laps to kind of get started after that. But other than that, it was just slow and steady.

Yeah, when she's on, she is on. Just like we saw at her run at Tunnel Hill that just, yeah, when things are clicking for her, watch out.

Jason, what are your thoughts on watching and seeing that?

It's impressive. I can't imagine spending that much time running circles on a track. Definitely not why I got into ultra running at all, but I like to see these records go down. I shared a few miles with Camila Bandera in January this year where she ran the 100K Trail Championship, so she's definitely been on a mission between Comrades winning the 100K Trail Championship, setting a 100 mile record at Tunnel Hill and now Desert Solstice, so it's pretty impressive to watch her.

She's unbelievable, and if you follow her on social media, she's very open about her training methodologies. I know I saw a recent tweet where she said something to the effect of, everybody asks me where my long doubles are, like the back-to-back runs on a weekend or something, and she said she doesn't do them. You know, most of the time, her longest run during the week is 20 to 24 miles, and she just consistently bangs that stuff out. And so there's no real magic here, I don't think, in her formula, but just being consistent badass.

Yeah, when you have a great engine like she does and a really good base of fitness to build upon, that it doesn't take much to peak for a big event like that.

So that's our Token Trail current event. We've got a little bit also, speaking of marathons, not ultra marathons, we've got to talk about Boston for a brief second. Boston announced its fields this week. I do love the way they do it. They typically kind of release their fields in three phases. First, they confirm whether or not the defending champions are going to come back, and it is confirmed that Des will be back to defend her title as well as Citizens Champion Yuki Kawaguchi from Japan will be back to defend his title after a crazy Boston this year in 2018 with the weather. And then they released the rest of the US field, and then next week, which came out this week, and then next week they will release the international field as well. And so we've got some things to get excited about here. I would say that my first reaction in looking at these fields is that it's not quite as stacked as the field looked so far from a US standpoint as the field was this past year, because this past year you had Shalane, you had Molly, you had Dez, you had Jordan Nasseh on the women's side, on the men's side you had Rupp, and a host of others that could be competitive. This year the field isn't quite that same depth, but still really, really solid, and I think some interesting matchups. Shalane, for her, for her, you know, next step is not doing Boston, so that was one thing is that she wasn't on this list, which kind of continues to have us doubt as to whether Shalane is actually going to be retired or not. But she's not showing up, but you do have Jordan Nasseh coming back, hopefully as her first marathon, post a couple of injuries after dropping out of both Boston and Chicago. You got Des Linden also, of course, defending her title. Sarah Hall, this will be her first time to run Boston, which is going to be really interesting. It's going to be interesting to see how she stacks up against Jordan and Des as somebody who could be a threat to make the team in 2020. And you've got Lindsay Flanagan, Becky Wade, Sarah Crouch, and Sarah Sellers, who got second last year to Des in that, again, crazy weather. So an interesting field, I think, particularly for those top three. Jordan, to see if she can come back and bounce back from injury, Des to see what she can do in defending her title. And then Sarah Hall competing in Boston for the first time. I'd love to see her mix it up with the best of the best. And I think she will, especially knowing how her husband Ryan and now coach approached this course as aggressively as he did when he had his opportunities to run it. On the men's side, you've got Dathan Ritzenhine also trying to come back from kind of a series of injuries. Abdi Abin-Rafman, who ran New York. Jared Ward, who was the top American in New York. You've got Elkina Kabet from the Scott Simmons group. Tim Ritchie, Shadrack B. Watt, who got third in Boston last year behind Drafi Karoui, Aaron Braun and Brian Schrader. So, and I should mention Scott Faubel. I think he was second in New York this year of the Americans. And so it's an interesting field there. I think pretty evenly matched on the American men's side. No real clear favorites there. A bunch of guys that we know can run between 312 and 313, depending on what Ritz can do. If he can come back, he's got a little faster PR. So it'll be interesting to see what you have from this field. Personally, I like Scott Faubel from that list, as somebody who got second American in New York, who I think could come and bounce back for a strong performance here if I were going to give my early opinions about it. But otherwise, of course, we'll break all of that down as we get closer to Boston, and I'm already working on my press credentials for that. Hopefully, we'll be able to get into the press conferences like we did in New York. So that's the quick update on Boston. We'll hear about the international fields next week, in which case we'll do a little bit more of a preview and early stage predictions before, of course, we do our more full predictions as we get closer to the race. So there you go. That's what we've got to look forward to in spring marathons. Beyond that, I wanted to jump in with you guys and talk about trail. First, I wanted to give a little bit more complete intro of Paul to remind people who maybe haven't listened to Episode 3 in a while of Paul's background. I want to... So just as a highlight, Paul's a two-time top ten finisher at Western States. He's been the US 100-mile trail champion, has also been named the US. Trail Masters Runner of the Year, and done some fun things, like just won his first 100-miner outright here at the Chattanooga 100 after coming back from stress fracture. Paul is a guy that I've known since 2004, back when he wasn't running on the trail and wasn't doing ultras, was primarily doing road racing and Ironman triathlons at the time. And I learned early on back then, when we were working on the track with Al Shipafools here in Austin, that if you were ever behind, or sorry, ever in front of Paul in a workout, that was because he wanted you to be, not because you were actually fitter or faster than Paul. I remember the first race where we both lined up together. It was the 3M half shortly after we met, I think in January 2005, if I remember right. And somehow I beat you that day and was feeling pretty good about myself. I'm like, man, Paul's been kicking my ass in workouts, but somehow I beat him today here at 3M in the half. And then I ran into you getting on the bus because that's a point-to-point race. And so you take a bus back to the start, ran into you getting back on the bus, and said, hey, how was your day, Paul? Trying to hide my gloating. And he was like, man, I've got the flu or something. I've been sick all week. So he came out, still crushed the race. He wasn't that far behind me. And so I suddenly, my ego just went to the wayside. And that solidified for me that Paul was always going to be the stronger runner. And since then, we've had a lot of opportunities to train together, which is always a pleasure, because Paul keeps me honest and kicks my ass. But I wanted to share that anecdote before we dive in. Also before we dive in, Paul, I wanted to get your take on your recent injury. So you generally have been a pretty healthy runner.

Yes, I've been really fortunate.

But had a stress fracture recently, and came back from that to get a win in a 100-mile. Talk about that. Tell us a little bit more.

It has been the last six months, certainly the journey from the presentation of pain in late May, and really took all of June and into July to finally figure out exactly what was going on. And yeah, stress fracture, mid femur, right femur, lateral and a little bit proximal. And so it's not a very common injury in runners, if at all. You see it in military recruits who are just ramping up their physical exercise for the first time, and then first-time marathoners, of which I'm neither. And it wasn't until doing, once I got back to ground running and did a gait analysis at RunLab here to tease out the root cause. Some hip imbalances that had just accumulated over time from some tight hamstrings and things like that. And really easy fix to get it fixed so that I don't do it again in the future. So since then, running has been great. The hardest part was, I think, having a punt right on Western States, and then Collegiate Peaks Loop FKT attempt with a buddy, Nick Pettitella, in Colorado, and then have to bail on Tour de Gents in Italy in September. So those, yeah, once I think got through the emotional roller coaster of having to cancel some pretty cool plans this summer, yeah, just get back to it and start building up volume consistently and get a lot of 45-minute runs, hour runs, hour 15 runs, not a lot of intensity, but just building up that muscle memory.

Stress fractures are interesting injuries. I've had a couple myself. On one hand, they're nice in terms of running injuries because once you know you have it, there's a fairly defined timeline to sort of address it, stay off of it, and then build back gradually, versus some of these soft tissue injuries or nerve issues that might just linger for a long time or you might have trouble kicking. And so in that way, it's nice because it's well defined. But the tricky part is, as you alluded to, is trying to figure out why it happened so that it doesn't come back and happen again. So talk about, you kind of highlighted that a little bit with your work with RunLab. What did you learn from that? And what are you doing now to prevent those root causes?

Yeah, the first thing, right, in the asking the five whys, right, to get down to the root cause of what it was. And I reached out to all sorts of biomechanical experts at different universities that had done research papers, right, to try and find a linkage between, right, whether it's tight hamstrings or stride length and injuries. But all of my research there led to that shorter stride generally leads to less impact on our limbs. So that was a dead end. And then also looking at training stresses and things like that in volume. But comparing it to my buildups the previous five times for western states, there really wasn't a big difference in volume or elevation or periods between races. So that wasn't a good answer for me. And then it was, hey, let's get some biomechanical feedback for it so that, yeah, you don't repeat it in the future. And so now what that looks like, right, it's just running a little bit wider, maybe an eighth of an inch each side. There was a really good period of hip mobility, strength on the hip rotary machine to strengthen up the hips and really just keep that hip line level. So there's a good amount of conscious thought into my running these days and then pushing off with my toes as well. Yep.

It's interesting, as somebody who's had a lot of success running, who's trained relatively injury-free for a long time, when these things pop up, you're sort of like, what the hell happened? Because you think you're doing all the things right, you haven't changed things dramatically, and then suddenly you have this big injury. It happened to me similarly with a heel stress fracture a couple years ago at Boston or leading into Boston and then at Boston. And I had all the same questions, but what you don't realize is that you do accumulate these sort of little imbalances, little sort of overuse issues that might pop up that can come at you like in sort of stealth mode. And then here they are, like right in your face with the stress fracture. But it's just a good reminder that we're all potentially susceptible, and you got to stay on top of all those little things all the time to try to keep that stuff at bay. And then even still it might happen. And then what happens is what you do is you learn, you get stronger, and then you go win a hundred miler. You know, your first outright win at a hundred miler, coming off that injury, which is really, really cool. How did that feel?

That felt amazing, right? There was certainly a lot of pent up race preparation and planning that had gone into Western states, which didn't happen. So then to be able to really think about Chattanooga 100 or just my next race, whatever that was going to be, which at first I thought was going to be Hurt 100 in January because I got into the lottery for that. But then when I realized I needed UTMB points for 2019, that Chattanooga 100 appeared on the radar as the last domestic race that. Had five or more ITRA points for UTMB. So that's when it popped on the radar. And yeah, to be able to put it all together, legs felt great, planning felt great. It's just a dream come true to have that six-month window or that chapter just to end like that.

Storybook a little bit, which is awesome.

It is. It is. And I'm really thankful. And just a sense of gratitude that whole day into the night to be healthy and be running. And yeah, so, so thankful for that.

So quickly, recapping a little bit on episode 94 where we had Jason join us. That was really sort of a... We started with a case for trail there. Sort of why should people consider trail if they're maybe doing a bunch of road stuff or doing road marathons? Interestingly, I signed up for my first 50-miler in Squamish next August, which I'm excited about, sort of on the backs of that episode, switching gears a little bit over next summer to get off the roads and do some trail, so you guys can coach me up on that. But we started with the case for trail, then we kind of gave an overview of the key elements that people need to think about when they make that transition to trail training. And today we're going to drill in a little bit more on those elements. But I wanted to start simply with a question for you, Paul, to answer that first question. Jason and I both got the chance to answer it last episode, episode 94. But what's your case for trail? You're a guy who's done road racing, you've done Ironmans, you've done a mix of things, but now kind of have landed primarily on trail running as your main sport. So what does it mean for you, and why have you made that shift over time?

Trail running for me has been that opportunity every day to disconnect somewhat from how complicated life and work can be on a day-to-day basis, and to really get that escape and that time in nature that I wasn't always getting in triathlon or road running, right? When you're running in an urban environment, built up, and right, there's cars and bikes and scooters and traffic lights and things like that, that the chance to get out on the trail either with friends or our dog and just be out there unplugged, right, with no phone and no email access, that that's something that has really appealed to me. And so even if I'm not running trail every single day, it's definitely something that I look forward to.

And you still do road work.

Yes. Yeah, probably about 50% on average is still on the road. And it might be a combination where I'm on the road and then I'm on the trail and then I'm back on the road, whether it's out and back or a big loop. So try and link up a couple of our green belt spots with some road and some hill work in between.

You've always done a good job of maintaining that speed and turnover by keeping that road stuff going. As we now segue into the topic today, I was just sort of drilling into the details of trail running. We wanted to frame it. This is where I'll bring you and Jason with this idea that for those that are attempting ultras, the areas where they fail or finish or that might cause them to drop out or not have a good experience are pretty well studied and documented in that world. And so there's a particular study or at least body research has been pulled together by Jason Koob who can kind of highlight for us where it goes wrong. So we wanted to use that as sort of a starting point to then talk about how to make it go right for you, for those that are out there going to try trail. So I'm going to let you tee that up, Jason. What do we learn from the data on what causes people to fail in trail?

Yeah, so there hasn't been a lot of writing and research on ultra running and the way that cycling and road running has really covered well. And so Jason Koop wrote a book, Training Essentials for Ultra Marathon. I referenced this in the last podcast we did. And one of the, I think, really interesting things that came out of his book is this idea of failure points. And we'll get into a lot of reasons about why some of the things in this is unique to ultra running. There was some field research done, exit surveys on athletes leaving western states. And they looked at two different elements. First was reported reasons why athletes struggled at some point in the race. And then they looked specifically at self-reported reasons why athletes dropped out of the race. And so basically what you see is that, so I'll just give you the top seven reported struggles for runners because pretty much everything else is relegated to illness and injury. So the first thing that came up was blisters, nausea and or vomiting, which we can just call GI distress, muscle pain, exhaustion, inadequate heat acclimation, inadequately trained in muscle cramping. So then the self-reported reasons for dropping, and we'll just hit the top three here, but you had nausea and or vomiting. That was 23% of runners. Unable to make cutoffs was another 18%, and then there was a kind of other category that captured about 12% of people. And then when you get down to the bottom of the list of 14 reported reasons, .7% reported inadequately trained. And what the key insight that I think Coup offers here is to say, well, actually, that list should be sort of inverted, and you can train all of these failure points, as he calls them. And so you would really want to put sort of inadequately trained up at the top of that list and say, you know, you weren't either physiologically or mentally prepared, you weren't physically prepared, you hadn't done what you needed to do to figure out a good nutrition and hydration strategy, you didn't practice it during your training, you didn't experiment. And so these are kind of some of the things we can get into today is how, you know, training and especially the trail is sort of a laboratory for an ultra athlete. You're constantly experimenting with race strategies, training strategies, gear strategies, nutrition and hydration strategies. And then we can kind of get into why some of these things are so important to come up as issues in ultra running as we move forward.

Yeah, yeah, in general, right, I think of ultras as 30% or a third physical, a third mental, and a third logistical. As far as the planning, right? And each race may be a little bit more physical or a little bit more logistics. But in general, if you think about it, in those three slices, right, the physical side, the mental side, and just the logistical planning side of what you're going to need, and whether it's clothes or food or access and directions for your crew and things like that. So...

And Paul is famous as an engineer by original degree from Cornell for these massive binders.

Yeah, right. You got to have it.

You know, like planning binders. And I'm not talking about a binder that might have 10 races' worth of information in it. I'm talking about a binder per race with all the gory details about his plan going into that race. As I've known you, Paul, I think trail running is as much about solving a problem, like an engineering problem, you know, planning and then executing it than it is about anything else for you, which is fun to watch. But yeah, so if there's a race you want to run and you know Paul, just ask him for his binder. If you know Paul has done it, he's got a binder for it that has all the details and planning in it.

Yeah, and we're happy to share. I know we've sent our TDS binder to our friend John Diana, who did TDS last year, and he was able to use all that information for Europe for his race. And I think I got a Facebook message last night from somebody who's doing Lake Sonoma 50 for the first time, and I know I've got at least one binder and a couple of binder clips worth of course notes on that one, so I'll definitely share that with him.

Yeah, and I used all of your Bandera training camp notes for Bandera this year.

Oh, yeah. I got some good notes on Bandera training camp and Western States training camp and the race itself, having done it five times. So it's always fun to revisit those and look back and then be able to plan something forward and help out other people, too.

I'll need your Squamish binder for sure.

Yes, we have that. Well, I'm surprised that you didn't sign up for the 50-50. That's a good little double right there.

That sounds like too much. We're going to start with one ultra.

All right. Well, Gary Robbins, he'll treat you right up there.

Yeah. And all right, so I want to dig into some of these failure points, kind of talk about it, because I think there's some physical, some mental, and some planning-related elements involved in all of these. And we'll kind of start small, so to speak, on hopefully the things that are easier to pick off and then work our way towards the big item here, which as we kind of talked about in planning is sort of nutrition and hydration strategy. If you don't get that right and if you're not trained for what you're going to use out there and you don't plan it well, then you're pretty much done before you start. But there's some other things kind of leading up to that that are also important. You mentioned blisters as an issue first on that list, or at least first on the list that you read. Talk about that, because I don't even know as a road runner, I don't typically have to worry about that. You might end up with some blisters in a marathon or a black toenail afterwards, but it's something because the timeline is so short that doesn't really ever affect your performance. But obviously in an ultra, it can take you out if you don't properly take care of your feet. So we'll start with you, Paul. What are the things to think about there? At what point do you think about changing shoes, changing socks? How does all that stuff come into play? Because I just frankly have no idea.

Yeah, I feel for one, it's that this also falls into the category of inadequate training. Because if you haven't trained enough or in the right conditions, then your feet aren't going to be tempered and hardened and calloused in the right places for you to do the event that you're training to do. So, hey, on your training run, if there's a creek, maybe not step over and skip over the water and the rocks. Maybe get your feet wet, because it might be raining and just pouring buckets on race day. And you might have to run with wet feet for 6, 10, 12, 14 hours, whatever it may be. That, hey, had you done that during training, right, your feet would know what that feels like and, right, toughen up as a result of that. And so to some degree, just like training is a stimulus for our cardiovascular and muscular system, we can do things like that. That is the stimulus for our feet to harden up in the right places.

Terrain, too, as well, right? If you have steep ups, steep downs, all of that's going to affect where your feet get the hot spots on race day. So you got to be ready to practice on that same kind of terrain, right?

Yes. Yeah, that, too, with the heat, you know, and get comfortable with your socks and your shoe setup. What's the right thickness? For that, are you a thin sock person, a thick sock person? Get your shoe fitness right. Shoelace tension, right? How tight do you like your shoes? Do they loosen up over time after you've been running for three hours or four hours? So figuring all that out in advance is one of those things that really helps. And for me, if I can go without choosing a shoe and sock change, all the better, right? Because that just takes time. You're going to be sitting there doing it. So Chattanooga 100, right? Same pair of Drymax socks and same pair of Hocus Pico IIs the whole time. Didn't even have to tighten up my shoes or anything like that because I knew that it was going to be wet all day. So kind of just gave them a little extra cinch and double knot before the race. Just knowing that when they get wet, right, they loosen up just a little bit. So if you start with them tight, then you're not going to have a problem later on.

So how does that affect shoe size? You know, I've heard people say, well, your feet might swell and you might need to size up a little bit or change to a bigger size later in a race, if that's an issue for you. So talk about that piece of it. Are you sizing up or not?

For sure, when I started hundreds in 2012, I did have that problem, right, that my feet would swell up a little bit and I'd either have to go to a thinner sock or a thinner insole or a combination of both. But then I found in the years after that, that I really didn't have that problem. So I don't know if that's something that's particular to just me or if other runners have that issue as well. So now I always opt for a little extra space in my shoes and I'm a 13, so I can't really go much bigger without going to a 14.

What about you, Jason? How do you think about blisters and footwear?

My feet went up or my shoe size went up about a half a size when I started running 50Ks. That would have been around 2007 or 2008. And I've stayed there since then. I like a little bit of a wide toe box. I don't really expense a lot of swelling and I really don't like to change shoes or socks in a race, although when I do, it feels awesome. So I'll do it like if I end up in ankle deep mud and muck and I know my feet and socks or my shoes and socks are just full of mud and rocks and shit, then you got to get it out of there because if you get any kind of debris inside of your shoe or worst case inside of your sock, that's going to create a friction point. And so you're going to get a hot spot there. You know, let's touch on some of the points we covered. So rocky terrain is going to create a lot more friction as your foot moves around inside of your shoe, as you're just really on a really unstable ground surface. And then running up and downhill is going to make it worse. I am a prolific sweater, so whether it's summer and the creeks around Austin are dry or it's the spring, winter, or fall and the creeks are full, I am always wet. My feet are always wet. So I pretty much like 50% of my trail running is in wet shoes. And I just do it. I do it so that I figure out how I can kind of overcome that. And so now it's just like second nature. I make sure I have shoes that drain really well. So I never wear a Gore-Tex. I don't really get into mountain running shoes. Like as much as I like La Sportiva, their shoes just don't drain as well. A lot of shoes aren't designed to be wet all the time. And so that's something to really take into consideration. Socks, I like a left-right specific sock that is really designed to fit the foot well. So like a stance sock is, I'm really big on that. And I like a high sock that comes up above my ankle so that I can really, really mitigate the possibility that any kind of debris gets inside my sock. So then it's just in my shoe, and I have a little bit more of a barrier I can get on for a while like that. And so then it is just a matter of, you got to make sure you spend time in those shoes, running, don't wear, make sure your shoes are well worn. I mean, at Bandera this year, I actually got blisters for the first time that I've ever had blisters in a race or really running. And I had a new pair of Hokas, but I had put like 80 miles on them. I thought I would be good to go. And it turns out just they weren't broken in enough. And so then you're always kind of running that fine line, like, I'm going to put 100 miles on your shoes today, so I want to make sure they're good, but they also need to be broken in, right? Yeah, and so you got to kind of play with balances like that, and that's where I fall out on it.

Well, you, but I would assume no matter what, you're bringing spare shoes, socks, just in case something happens.

Yeah, and you need some blister treatment kit, too, so you're going to want to have some kind of either band-aid or mole skin protection with you, and that's going to depend on what kind of event you're out on, whether you're out for a long time on the trail by yourself, and so you're carrying that kind of equipment, or you may be keeping your drop bags. Your crew has some different things that you can use, but, like, because some scissors will be nice if you want to cut anything off in order to better protect yourself and think about, like, anything you have. It needs to be waterproof. It's like a waterproof band-aid, which will stick well for a while, and you may have to continually work through those treatments as you go throughout the race, but an untreated foot injury like that is going to be is just going to get worse and worse and worse until the point where you just can't run anymore because you're limping, and now you're exposing yourself to some other kind of injury. So maybe you reported dropping out because of an injury in your right hip, but that injury stemmed from this blister that you had on your foot that you either didn't treat well or it just got to you in the end.

And worst case, right, to mitigate if you do end up in a situation with a blister that you didn't expect, right, if you carry a little tube of Aquaphor, right, it's just a little thing of petroleum jelly, right, if your lips get chapped or something like that, you have that with you. But you could also just kind of put some lube down there real quick and kind of maybe get you to that next aid station where you do have either a change of shoes or blister care kit or something like that. But that's always something that can just help ease that friction just a little bit and get you through.

That's a great point. So the theme you'll see across all these failure points is that when it comes to ultra running, you're so much more exposed to problems because of the duration of the event that you're engaged in. And so you don't want to let anything linger. If you recognize something's coming up, nip it in the bud as soon as possible, even if that is a temporary solution to get you to the next point where you can treat it in more depth. But you always want to make sure that you get on top of anything, whether it's a blister, nutrition, hydration, or cramping, if it is.

And shoe options, too. It's always good to know that, hey, at this next age station, right, if I need to change shoes, I can either change in to write my backup pair of my primary shoes or a different model or something that has less tread or more tread or a road shoe, if you know that there's a more flatter section coming up. So having those options. And then socks as well, spare socks, just in case.

You make a good point there. Just about an ultra, it's a long day. So little problems can quickly spiral into bigger problems.

Yes.

And so this is really all about being, as we've said before on this show, a problem-solving motherfucker.

That's right.

Like, so you nip those problems in the bud before they become bigger issues that force you out of the race. One note on the footwear side, a lot of my friends in marathoning talk about losing toenails all the time. I don't understand that. I've never lost a single toenail because of road marathoning. I think part of that is because I have shoes that are big enough for my feet. I like to have a full thumb width at the end between my big toe and the end of the shoe. And I think, especially as somebody who's worked on the shoe for a long time, people are chronically in shoes that are too small for them, and they think if they size up that there's going to be something wrong or they'll be too loose or whatever. But I would say, encourage you for those road marathoners as well as the trail folks, just give yourself at least a full thumbnail at the end, and then you won't lose those toenails that you always lose in your marathons.

And the bulk of, I think the bulk of toenail loss is probably from impact to rocks and things like that, that you're out there on the trail, that you're going to stub your toe on something, whether it's a rock or a root, and it's going to happen. And so that impact, regardless of how big your shoes are, right, it's just going to happen.

Yeah, and I've never had toenail issues, but Stephen Moore, who runs on our Spectrum Race team, is another local trail running legend, and says toenails are optional. He has none, which is awesome. You should ask him about it over here sometime.

He was born like that.

The shoe thing is really tougher. If you're getting into ultra running, it's something you've really got to try out, because I like a thumb width, but if you have too much room in the toe box, that can be an opportunity for a lot more friction. But I don't like my toes jabbing into the end of my shoe when I'm running downhill a lot, so it's going to be individually specific, and you need to experiment.

And home foot care, right? Whether it's on a weekly basis or biweekly basis of trimming your nails, maybe taking an emery board or some fine grit sandpaper and just lightly sanding your calluses. You don't have to get them all the way down.

Emphasis on lightly, yes.

Yeah, lightly. You don't want to do it too much, but just a little bit, and that's a carryover from I was a lightweight rower in college, and so we had calluses on our hands, but part of the right deal is you got to maintain your hands and keeping them clean, because you don't want them to get infected. But the same thing applies to your feet.

Let's talk about muscle pain and cramping for a second, because that was something else you mentioned. I would assume with cramping, there's a hydration component. I want to set that aside for a second and just talk about this idea that your muscles are going to be in pain from doing work over long periods of time. How do you think about that? How do you prepare for it? Is it just normal? Suck it up and deal? Or are there some specific things you can do to try to push that off as much as you can?

For me, right, that comes with what you signed up for. You sign up for Squamish 50, you know that towards the end of that, there's going to be some pain. It's going to hurt. But this is what you paid good money for. And be prepared to embrace it and say, hey, right, right, here I am. My legs hurt. Oh yeah, this is, I knew that this was going to happen. This is no surprise.

I signed up for this.

I signed up for this.

But I would say, what do you say though, like Squamish 50 just as an example? I haven't run it obviously, but I plan to and I've got to think about what that course looks like. You've got some pretty steep and intense uphills and downhills in that course that are going to require muscle adaptation, right, both in getting used to hiking some steep sections uphill as you gain altitude and then dealing with some steep downhill sections, which, yeah, of which I'm used to doing. And so if I'm facing a course with that kind of terrain, is it just about replicating that as closely as I can and getting out and training on those, or are there other things I can do to prepare for that up and down?

So my point, my perspective on this is that this is where for an ultra runner, strength training is super important. So the more muscle mass that you have, the more you can dissipate the damage that's going to come. And so as you're spending more time engaged in that activity, you're going to accumulate more muscular damage, which is where a lot of your pain is coming from. And so the more muscle you have that can absorb that damage, the better off you're going to be. So for those of you that can't see Paul, he has huge legs, like giant leg and hamstring, or hamstring and quad muscles. And I think that helps him a lot, especially for the long run. And when I got into ultramarathoning, I weighed 190 pounds, and it was all muscle. I spent five days a week in the gym on top of rock climbing, on top of running and swimming and biking. And so I've lost 30 pounds of that mass, but I still, at 165 pounds, I'm a lot bulkier than most of the athletes that train with us here in the marathon groups, and I constantly work out. I mean, strength training is a big part of my program because I feel like it makes me stronger as a runner. It helps me endure the pain over, especially the last kind of third of an ultra when I'm really like, the pain is set in, I'm really bearing down, and I'm trying to just close it out. And so that's my biggest recommendation is to focus on that, strength training, and then just figure out how to suffer.

And it's full body, too. I know we mentioned that on our episode 94. It's a full body workout when you're hiking uphill, right?

Right.

And let me ask you this, Paul. In your world, speaking about strength, what percentage of the time you spend on strength is, first of all, upper body versus lower body? So I'd be curious to get that mixed. And then second of all, I'd be curious to get sort of the mix between power-oriented stuff that might be higher weight, lower reps, versus more body weight or functional mobility type of work. If that's another spectrum. So give me a little color on your routine.

Yeah, earlier in my career, both triathlon and earlier in my ultra running, there was a free weight component to my strength training. And I think the last two years, mainly by virtue of working with Jason's wife, Mallory, of really doing a high quality, not necessarily long, maybe 30 minute routine once a week that she mixes up. That's a mix of body weight, both upper and lower body, but then also with some dumbbell free work or kettlebell work. So it's been a combination of that, but it's at a period, typically, it's either been midweek or later in the week for me, but it's a really good time where I'm a little bit fatigued, but I'm not totally fatigued like I would be towards the end of the weekend. So it's a really good targeted routine that changes up each week, and that's really helped me, right, particularly these last couple months as I've gotten back into running, to have that routine and stimulate, right, the muscles and balance in different ways each week.

So that's your primary mode now on the strength side. As you've evolved that programming, and particularly gone to the Mallory work, what's different? What do you think is unique that's giving you more of an advantage now than maybe what you were doing eight, ten years ago?

Certainly, right, balancing the workload and the rest load and all of that, I think previously I'd be doing a little more doubles. And now really it's almost predominantly singles each day with at least one full day of rest each week, maybe with some active like walking or easy cycling or easy swimming. But yeah, finding that balance that works for you as far as the workload and the rest load, and then balancing that with the rest of your life, whether it's your job, if you have kids, travel, family stuff, things like that. So where that fits in with the other stresses in your life.

But it's not crazy is what you're saying. It's just consistent.

Yeah, it's consistent. And even looking right back at the last couple months, I've been in that 8 to maybe 14 hour a week of running training time, not including the strength work for that, which I think compared to everybody else, that's not abnormal. So it's just building upon the whole body of work that I've had over a couple of decades. And seeing that really resonate and bubble up to the surface. It's been confidence building to know that, hey, I can have a setback like that. And then just get back on to it gradually. And that fitness doesn't disappear even after a two-month layoff.

Let's talk about...

So one thing that I wanted to kind of follow up on that, Paul, is I know sometimes you and Mallory work on this idea of neuromuscular recruitment, and figuring out, like, can I get in touch with my body enough that I could actually sort of change muscular recruitment as I fatigue? I mean, is that something that you guys actively work on? Have you seen that you've been able to implement that in your training, in your racing? Have there been any benefits from that?

If she's doing that, she hasn't told me. So I hope I'm glad that you mentioned that, because she's probably doing that.

The methods are the matters.

Just by virtue. But no, I'm sure it's part of her grand master plan. So I just put my faith in her, put my faith in Coop as my coach, and yeah, just execute and get done what you got to get done. Check the block, provide the feedback, and then adjust as necessary.

Trust your coach. In that case, your strength coach. Let's talk about heat for a second. And again, there ultimately is a hydration component to this, but a lot of, I think there's a misconception about heat, which is that hydration is the solution to heat management when really it's adapting to the heat and then staying cool by, in many cases, externally cooling your body that can really play a difference in a race where heat's a factor. Western States is obviously one of the more prominent examples of a 100-mile where heat plays a huge role as you get to the valley on potentially 100-degree days there. And you're famous in Austin for your heat acclimation training. Talk a little bit about that. How do you prepare for the heat, and then how do you manage it on race day?

Yeah, and conversely, before I talk about the heat training, let's talk about Chattanooga 100, where you've got a drizzly, damp day, maybe 50 degrees, and it's raining on and off throughout the day. And so you're not worried about overheating. You're worried about staying warm. And even though it's raining, so conscious decision of every crude aid station, I'm changing my shirt, right, changing my hat to dry hat. My crew swapped out my pack, so at least I wasn't in a soaking wet pack each time. And then whether conditions permitting, grab a jacket if need be. So for me, thermal management, that was, hey, I'm like, right, key for this is going to be staying warm or as warm as possible, stay as dry as possible, and then keep the calories coming in, right? Because you're just going to be burning a little more energy to stay warm. So particularly right now that we're in the winter season, that thermal management of the right clothing choice. And even though I was wearing a shirt, I carried gloves. Really, I just wore gloves for maybe the first five miles and then maybe at the turnaround at mile 51 because it was cold and coming down buckets of rain. So that's the other side of that, of conditions of, hey, I've got to preserve my thermal energy and not get too cold because then you're less likely to drink and eat, less likely to make good decisions, whether it's navigation or you just go off course or something stupid. So keeping the right mindset for that.

Which in some races means also having the right gear, which could range dramatically, especially if you're at a race in the mountains where you might be, even Western States is a perfect example of that, where you might have snow on the top of that first peak and then desert heat-like conditions and other parts. So you've got to make sure you've got all the gear for all of it. And I think that's where people make bad decisions sometimes, which ultimately might cost them in a race.

Yeah, that's that logistical side of it, that third logistical piece where, hey, pack it, bring it, have it in the car so that your crew has it. Better to have it and not need it than need it and not have it.

So let's talk about your heat training for the month of May and early part of June here in Austin, gearing up for Western States. You'll be wearing layers and beanies and causing your wife, Meredith, all kinds of consternation about laundry and so forth. So talk about what you've learned in your years of adapting to heat.

Yes, that little extra stimulus, whether it's extra clothes, if you're outside running or on a treadmill or getting in the sauna post-run. And it doesn't have to be for super long, but maybe 30 minutes or so for one to two weeks beforehand, before your race. That's going to be a really good protocol to get you in that ballpark to acclimate the best that you can for the conditions that you're expecting.

And then on race day, it seems like also with Western States, we talked about in those moments, you know, like the river crossing, you always make it a point to submerge yourself there on a hot day to cool the body down so that when you get to that next stage of the race, you're in a decent spot versus those that might just kind of like splash a little water on themselves. They might feel good, but they don't necessarily make a difference. That may not make a difference in their core body temperature. But talk about that, and how do you manage heat on race day itself?

Yes, and for Western States in particular, right, Rocky Chucky River Crossings, mile 78. So it's late, later in the race, even for the front of the field, right? The sun's starting to set, it's still hot, and the bulk of the heat management comes much, much earlier in the race. Very, very early, grabbing as much ice as you can. Get it in your hat, get it in your bandana, put it in your arm coolers if you're wearing that. If you have a pack that has a little pouch in the back, you can put some ice back there, because then it'll just melt and keep your torso as cool and wet as possible. Light colored clothing helps as well for that. And yeah, keep eating and drinking, right? Because there's both the external cooling effect, but then there's also the internal as well to stay hydrated.

Where do you stand on sunscreen? Like so in a hot condition, hot race or an exposed race? Are you clothes or sunscreen?

I'm going to go, we'll certainly start in the race with sunscreen, particularly nose and ears and things like that. A really hot race, I'm going to have arm coolers on, right? So I'm going to be covered there and probably a short sleeve shirt or a sleeveless shirt. So a little bit of sunscreen on the neck and the shoulders. But typically don't reapply unless you really need to and going to be out in blazing exposed sun for a long time, which I don't think I've done a race like that. It'd be different, right, if you were out on a track, right, running through the middle of the sun out there. And you might need to get that or bad water, right, for those that are out there. That sunscreen and that reflective sun from the pavement can be really powerful, right? They're stories of people getting the roof of their mouth or the inside of their noses sunburned because of the reflection coming up from the pavement. And so you've got to prepare for that.

Yeah, similar to the problems we see in Mountaineering. Yeah, so I don't like sunscreen, and I've had problems with just not being able to sweat. I'm a prolific sweater, and so I've had like nearly blacked out on runs before when I did apply sunscreen training here in the summer. And so I wear long-sleeved dry wick, loose fitting shirts. I like something that has a zipper kind of down the chest. For a long time, I ran into cycling jerseys, because that was like the best thing I could find. And that way, I could stay cool enough. I could give you hot or shit anyway. And so you get the evaporative cooling effect of the clothes soaking up all that sweat coming off of you, and then you don't have to worry about porous clogging or anything like that. But the face and the kind of ears and neck are good to protect. Yeah. A little bit of sunscreen.

Yeah, I gravitate towards natural sunscreen. High percentage of zinc oxide. Think Sport here in Austin makes a great product for that. And it's thick, but it's also moisturizing as well. So particularly if you're in a dry environment out running, it always helps to just not have chapped skin out there. It's just a little comfort factor that helps as well for that. And it's nice also having little blister packs and drop bags just in case you do need it, right, that are easy to carry. And you can even put them in a pack if you're doing a multi-day race or just have a long stretch between aid stations where you think you might need it.

Yeah.

So you mentioned hydration, nutrition as a factor here. So let's segue to that, because we definitely need to spend some time on it. First of all, let's just set the table. Obviously, there's the tactical element here, but I sort of want to make... help people understand why this is so important. And certainly, there's the obvious, which is that you're running a long way, you need calories to fuel that, so that seems fairly obvious. But the reason it's complicated is because things happen to your stomach when you're exerting yourself for these many hours that I don't think it's... I should say, it's probably impossible to understand until you get there, where your stomach basically stops working, in which case you can have all sorts of outcomes, nausea, vomiting, inability to take in calories for long periods of time, inability to really take in proper hydration for periods of time, so that you basically run out of gas. And so talk about that. What's happening when things go wrong with nutrition and hydration?

So I'll jump in here. So this is important because I think, well, maybe the reason we're highlighting this is, this comes to the top of the list of reasons why racers drop out of races. So this is one of the most common ailments that runners run into, and the most common reason why they drop out of a race. So we'll dig in on this. So yes, obviously you need food to get through the race, but what you also need is water. Your body cannot digest food without water, and digestion is one of the lowest items on your body's list of priorities when it comes to how you use water. So there are four key physiologic functions that water serves in your body. You have blood volume, so you have the blood plasma in your blood, is the primary reservoir you have for sweating. So thermal regulation that we talked about just a minute ago is managed through sweating, and so your body is taking water from your blood plasma in order to support that thermal regulation process. But then also you need to keep your blood volume high so that you can keep your blood pressure as low as possible so that it's easiest for your heart to transport oxygen to working muscles. So as your body takes water from the blood plasma to support thermal regulation, your blood volume drops. Your heart rate raises because your heart's working harder to pump oxygen to working muscles. So you have to kind of keep that in mind. So blood volume number two, then thermal regulation. And then the third on the list of priorities for water in your body is gut motility and digestion. So that is basically moving food throughout your body. And so if you get hot enough or your blood pressure gets low enough, your body will just quit supporting the digestive process. And so it will also, if you get dehydrated enough, quit supporting the thermal regulation process, which is where heat stroke comes in, and you can get into really severe trouble from that. And then down at the bottom of the list is waste removal. So also if you get dehydrated enough, you put yourself at the risk of kidney trouble, maybe as bad as kidney failure. And so you want to make sure that... So this is why water and nutrition, they're synergistic, they go together, these strategies have to be synced. And so we can kind of get into how you manage all of that. But that's when it becomes important, and this really becomes important after sort of five hours, when you're going to run out of food and water or energy and water in your body. And so you really have to think, what is the long game? How am I going to fuel myself? And how am I going to keep this whole sort of physiologic system that's dependent on water running all day long?

So basically it's more complicated than just getting enough energy to run the whole damn thing.

Correct.

Which also means that your finish, your ability to finish and feel okay at any point during this thing is highly dependent on your strategy. Clearly you have to have a strategy. Clearly you also have to train to execute that strategy. So let's just use me as an example. Training for a 50-mile, my first ultra, next August. Squamish in... Squamish, by the way, is just north of Vancouver, between Vancouver and Whistler. How would you guys instruct me to one, think about preparing a nutrition strategy for that day, or I might be out there for 12 to 15 hours, potentially, and two, then how do I train for that? And which comes first? Do I think about the training first, or do I think about the plan first and work backwards? Paul, help me out.

For me, if it was me, I'd backward plan, right? This comes from my Army planning, training, of backward planning, right? So you start with your goal event, right? And the backwards plan, right? What are the 50K trial races that you're going to do for preparation, right? Are there some 25Ks or 30Ks or a mix of distances that you're going to do prior to that in the month, two months, three months, four months before that? Because those are going to be great opportunities to practice whatever plan, hydration, nutrition plan that you're going to use on race day, right? And it's not just one plan, but you also have to have the backup plan in case plan A goes to shit. And then, oh yeah, what happens if plan B doesn't work? All right, so what's plan C? Right, and then, okay, what if that doesn't work? All right, well, I guess we're just drinking ginger ale and water or Coke and Mountain Dew and just making it to the finish line. Which, hey, if that's what it takes to get you to the finish line, soup and water, right? Ramen and, hey, that's good too.

That's what you gotta do.

But have that thought ahead of time so that you know, okay, if this doesn't work, right, if this combination of food and drink isn't working for me, right, the sweet, right, they say the sweet, the salty and the savory, right, that if you can incorporate a couple of those options each time, right, then that's gonna increase your chance for success because you're not gonna get that flavor fatigue of eating it or drinking the same thing over and over and over again. Some people can do it, right? They can take the same gel flavor over and over and over again, but some people just, they need some variety.

So Squamish, 50 miles, let's say it takes me 14 hours to do it. It's a challenging course. It might take less, it might take more. What would be plan A? What would that look like from a hydration standpoint and nutrition standpoint? What should I be drinking every hour? What should I be eating to sustain myself for that time period?

Okay, so we'll start with this assumption. You, your dietary paradigm lifestyle is carbohydrate-centric, right? So that we're going to work on carbohydrate and glycogen being your primary fueling source. And so then the first thing that we have to say is, okay, you need to understand your daily hydration status. And so I coach my athletes on using a sweat rate tracker to make sure that they can understand their daily hydration status. And there are a few different things that you can do just kind of anecdotally to track this. But then you can also sort of once a week or a couple times a month actually measure your sweat rate. And I like to do this throughout a year at least so that you have a good idea of seasonality. So like how does the temperature, how does the humidity level affect your sweat rate? And in 14 hours, you're going to be exposed to a lot of different elements, cold, hot, maybe humid, maybe dry. And so you want to have a good idea over the course of that race, how much water at any given time should I drink, because you don't want to drink too much, you don't want to drink too little, and it needs to match kind of your calorie intake. So then the other thing to consider is electrolytes. And so then it becomes a matter of how do I want to get my calories, how do I want to get my electrolytes throughout the day? Do I just like to drink water and eat food and maybe take salt pills, or do I like tailwind, where I can get both electrolytes and calories and then maybe balance that with some solid food, because tailwind won't always satiate the appetite, even though it might be all the calorie intake that you need. And so then really the key is, so your nutrition strategy is always going to be highly individualized, and it's going to have to do with your palate and what kind of foods you like and how those sit in your stomach. So then what I, Coach Athletes, is to think about your long runs and that timeout on the trail as a laboratory. Every one of those runs is a lab experiment. And you need to, just like any good scientist would do, control your variables. So don't try one day I'm going to do like tailwind and some peanut butter and jelly sandwiches and then a little bit of water, and then the next day I'm going to do all water, some salt tabs and epic bars, some meat bars or something like that, because then you have no idea what variable influences what, and so you kind of try some routine, pick something at the beginning, try that for a few runs, and if all goes well, you can kind of keep playing with that and then start playing with like palate variety, introduce a new food type or introduce caffeinated versus non-caffeinated tailwind, and then kind of see how that works, so keep a log. So meticulously track everything that you're trying and how you might think it affects you, and if you have a negative effect at one point, try that again. Can I replicate that in my next experiment? And then go from there, and just keep tweaking on the margins through your experimentation.

That all sounds really annoying for this road marathoner who likes to do long runs without nutrition.

Get used to it.

But it also sounds complicated for somebody who's not an engineer. But I'm going to do it. I'm committed to it. But what are the rules of thumb? Because some things I hear about or think about is, one, you should be hydrating early and often. So probably taking in something constantly, relatively throughout the day. I know Paul, I've seen you run it with two bottles at times where you're constantly sipping from both. I also know that if you're going to get the calorie balance properly, you need to be fairly consistent with your intake and not necessarily just stocking up at aid stations, but finding ways to get trickles of calories throughout the day. So what are my rules of thumb that I can use as a bedrock for my experimentation?

Should we both go after this one?

Yeah.

All right. So one thing is, and I think Paul would agree with me on this, I take control of my own hydration nutrition strategy. I don't eat off of aid station food. And I know this is, as a race director, I feel so bad about this because I know we serve nothing but junk food at our aid stations, and everybody swears that's what they want, but I don't eat that. I wouldn't rely on that, and I'm not going to turn over my race day performance to whatever somebody has at their aid station. So you want to have your own strategy. And then, you know, based on what you find from sweat rate tracking, you'll know how much fluid you need to take in per hour. And I just kind of... I go off of that. When I do eat, you want to get down something like, you know, 4 to 6 ounces of water with, say, 120 calories of food. I try to space out my calorie intake. You're looking at, you know, our bodies can process 2 to 300 calories per hour, depending on how efficient you are at digesting and metabolizing. And so, and then you want to try to get, it can get really into the weeds on how do I break that down between carbohydrates and proteins and fats, but rough general rule of thumb, 60 grams of carbohydrates per hour, 2 to 300 calories, and then your hydration is going to be specific to how you sweat. What's your sweat rate? What have you learned from tracking your sweat rate and how hydrated were you going into the day, and then what are your environmental conditions like? And really kind of thinking through all of that. And so I know that both Paul and I definitely like map out what that whole day looks like. What specifically do I want to eat? And it's not like I just want a bonk breaker bar here, but like I want a cookies and cream bonk breaker bar, and I want the mandarin orange non-caffeinated tailwind, and it's specifically broken down at every aid station. I turn that over to my crew so they know exactly what to deliver to me when I'll have to think about it, because I don't want to spend any mental energy thinking about my nutrition and hydration strategies after the day starts. I'm just executing on what I've practiced in the lab for the six months prior.

It's all in the binder, right, Paul?

It's all in the binder. And then you can break it down into little index cards and put those in the Ziploc bags that you have packed for each of your aid stations. Have you done that yet, Chris?

Working on the index cards.

All right, we'll get that and the Sharpie ready for you.

So are you taking food from aid stations? What does your strategy typically look like?

Some of those aid stations, right, some of the aid stations that there's no crew there. And so, right, you might be forced to take, for sure, right, you're going to take water there. If you're going to have soda, right, you might as well take some soda there. I've definitely taken some soup at some of those. I know at one of the drop bag aid stations at Chattanooga 100, I took soup on the way back because it was dark and cold. And some hot soup sounded fantastic. And it's salty, so I know that it sits well. We're there on the way out. I think I grabbed a little quarter of a peanut butter and jelly sandwich just because I was craving a little bit of food. But at the crude ones, right, Meredith and Brian, my other crew member, right, had little pieces of cut up pizza for me to grab because I knew, right, some savory and salty food was going to sit well with my race nutrition. So, yeah, having... I'm with Jason, right, definitely have it in your mind of exactly what you want, but also have backup plan for, hey, if this isn't working, all right, let's go to this as a backup plan.

That's a great reminder, yes. Have alternatives because you might run out of interest in certain things. You want flavor variety and that sort of. Yeah. You never know when you want a salted potato and some avocado instead of a stroopwafel.

Totally, and carrying one thing, carrying one of those little Ziploc snack bags with you, you could easily put it in your pocket or your pack. Because if you do want to grab something at the aid station and not necessarily eat it right then and there, you could just put it in that little Ziploc bag and take it with you. And it's not going to get everywhere. You don't have to hold it in your hand, so you can save it for later and nibble on it over time so that you're not getting that huge calorie hit all at once.

And then, Chris, I would counsel you to really think outside of the box about what constitutes a fuel source. So it doesn't have to come in a package or be sold as like an engineered endurance fuel. Real food goes a long way. And you never know when you're going to be like, I just want pancakes, eggs, and bacon right now. You just might have that at My Lady or 30.

Yeah, I've embraced that before when I did my first Half Iron Man. I had Skittles on the run because that sounded good to me versus gels. So I found another sugar source. So I get that. A couple things I'm hearing. One, flavor variety. Two, also salt, sweet, savory variety as well because you're going to get sick of having constantly just sweet stuff or constantly just salty or savory stuff. So balance there. And I would assume, Paul, you know what's going to be at the aid stations too. So you're able to say, okay, here's what they're going to have. Here's how that fits or not into my plan. And I might choose to plan to take something from the aid station because I know it's going to be there or just say, hey, I need to have my own stuff at that one because my crew will be there.

Yeah, most races will publish an aid station food list.

How do you adapt your body's ability to take in more calories per hour? Because I know that's an issue, right? You say 200 to 300 calories, but you have to train your body to accept that much in an hour. So how does that? Is that just a matter of practicing, or is there something else you can do to get better at taking in those calories?

I think your body is going to tell you when you're taking in too many calories, right? Either you're just not going to feel well. It's going to come up, or you're going to have to dash into the woods because you've been just taking in too many calories throughout the day. And it's going to tell you when you're at that end of the spectrum, so to speak.

So then you're going to get those cues. So that's another point to make here, is that even if you dial it in perfectly, it may not be working for you for whatever reason. The body responds uniquely, or the conditions are different than you might have expected. Suddenly you feel bad, or you can't keep food down, or you don't want what you have in your pack, and or you're getting low on fuel as a result. So how do you deal with those? How do you problem solve nutrition and hydration in the race itself when something starts to not go right?

Yeah, certainly stop doing whatever it was that caused that condition in the first place. And then try and get your body back to that level of homeostasis where things are kind of settled down, whether it's just sipping water for some period of time. And certainly that first step when things go south, slow down, right? Take a walk break, even if you need to just stop and get your heart rate down, whether that's a couple minutes, whether that's five minutes, whether that's ten minutes. And then gradually start moving again, reintroduce some water, make sure that that's staying down. And then if maybe at that point, start introducing some light calories. So there's definitely that reset mentality of, okay, things went south, stop doing whatever it was that got me here, reset, get the heart rate down, get the breathing rate down so that your body can catch up to whatever it is that you're asking of it.

Because you can work through it. I mean, I think that's the thing. Just like a bad patch in a marathon where you felt badly, but now all of a sudden you feel good again. Same thing can happen in a race like that, and you just can't let those little twists and turns stop you. As you said, reset, get back to homeostasis. Is there something there about not wanting to stop, wanting to keep moving? Is that bad to stop? Because I've also heard of those situations where somebody might come into an aid station, either dehydrated or maybe in some cases too cold, have to sit there for an hour to kind of recalibrate before they get back out there. Is that a no-no, or is that something to consider in the solution set?

No, that's definitely one of those that's in the solution toolkit of, okay, I overextended myself in one form or fashion. I need to take a hard reset here, sit down, take for, okay, I'll go back to Chattanooga 100, right? At the turnaround point, Mile 51, I've got a 15-minute lead on second and about an 18-minute lead on third. 13 miles later, Mile 64, that third-place guy, William Ansick, he's two minutes behind me, right? So he bridged up past second place. He's two minutes behind me at Mile 64. So he definitely extended himself a lot in that 13 miles because I wasn't soft-pedaling in that section. And right after the fact, right, he had to sit there at that aid station, get warm, get dry, kind of get some calories on board, and ultimately finish third, right? So it could have been a DNF right there, but he and his crew, they problem solved, got him back on course, kept him warm, kept him fed, kept him hydrated, and he finished third. So hats off to William and his crew for managing that effort mid-race and being able to make it to the finish line. Yeah, podium.

The second-place finisher at Superior 50 this year took a 30-minute nap on the side of the trail. Went out too hard, challenging one of our Rogue Virtual athletes, Colin Hagan, and blew up. Took a half-an-hour nap, woke up, and still finished second place, so you could definitely recover. One thing I would say about nutrition and hydration, and if you get in trouble, what you do, it's much easier to get out of a tight spot with a poor nutrition strategy or approach or tactical mistakes on the day. If you get a little bit behind on nutrition, you can climb out of that hole, because sugar, your body's just going to burn it quick. But if you get behind on hydration, it's a really tough hole to climb out of, and that's kind of like the crux of your day is managing that hydration strategy and overall hydration status, because if you get dehydrated, you may not ever get back from it.

Ever.

You will die.

So we'll emphasize here this idea that this is an individual journey. I think understanding your sweat rate is the biggest part of that on the hydration side, and then knowing what your palate sort of can handle in terms of calories on the nutrition side, and then experimenting with that. Now, Jason, you mentioned sort of the paradigm question of, you know, if you're a carb paradigm person versus a fat-adapted person, that might change the dynamics of your nutrition plan on race day. And obviously, there are ultra-runners that come from both camps, you know. Paul and you tend to be more in that carb-centric world versus others like Zach Bitter, more of a fat-adapted world. That's something you've been experimenting with and moving towards, Jason. So talk about that, at least in terms of the fat-adapted world. How does that change the approach from a nutrition standpoint?

Yeah, and this will actually affect your training as well as your racing and then your overall nutrition strategy. Basically, when you're fat-adapted, you're mostly aerobic training because your body can easily burn fat and oxygen. And then in an anaerobic state, your body is dependent on glycogen as its primary fuel source. So if you don't have glycogen stores in your body, then it's going to be hard to operate at that level. And so from a training perspective and an overall nutrition perspective, that's something that affects you. Now, there's a lot more going into studying the idea of strategic carbon take for fat-adapted athletes and using that both prior to hard workouts and then prior to an intra-race consuming carbohydrates. So, you know, I haven't done a lot. I haven't raced as a fat-adapted runner, so I haven't really built, like, a solid nutrition strategy for that part of it. I've done some research on it, and you're still going to consume carbohydrates, but in theory, you need a lot less fuel, so our bodies can store about 2, 000 calories' worth of glycogen that's going to come from complex and simple carbohydrates, but our body, you know, has easily 10, 000 calories of fat, an almost sort of infinite store, in theory, of fuel you can fuel on. And so with ultra running, you're spending so much more of your time in an aerobic state, and so if you can burn fat and still perform at sort of a high level in an aerobic state, then that can be a great way to go. And so even if you're on a carb-centric diet, it's important to kind of note that you have the potential to still work on fat adaptation, maybe as like a special block in your training or something to help you feel better on fat. I know this is probably something that you play with, Paul, because I've seen that you use Vespa, or at least have in the past, which can help sort of accelerate the body's ability to burn fat during exercise. And so, but if you're not well fat adapted, then your body is primarily going to want to consume glycogen, even if you're in an aerobic state or you're passing in between aerobic and anaerobic states. There are also concepts of metabolic flexibility we won't get into, but... So at a higher level, I guess, hopefully that covers it and is not too much rambling.

Are you, if you're in that state, does that mean you're taking in fewer calories because your body is supplying them through your fat stores or does that just mean the mix of food that you're taking is different on race day?

You would likely eat a lot less if you're a fat-adapted. You'd at least have the opportunity to. So it's not uncommon for a fat-adapted athlete to run a 50K without any nutrition. So I'll give you another example. I did a 20-mile long run quality workout this past Sunday. 20 miles with 12 miles at Marathon Gold Pace. So I was running about 620, 624 for two 6-mile blocks, and I had nothing but a liter of water on the day, and I felt great. And so you can definitely... I don't know how long you can get away without eating. I imagine that even Zach Better is probably eating something in a 100-mile race and a 50-mile race.

And the reality, I think, is that those guys at that end of the spectrum of that, when it comes to race nutrition, they're still putting away the carbs, because they are running at a high end of their aerobic abilities for that, even though granted compared to top speed, but they're doing it for that long of duration. And even for me, day-to-day nutrition doesn't look that different from what a Zach or Jeff Browning day-to-day nutrition looks like. Really good protein, salads, a little bit of carb here and there, but it's ebbs and flows with the training and racing training plan and where it is in the block of training. So it's just eatin' clean, eatin' healthy. Yeah, so it's a great convergence because as your training gets better and you get more fit, that the nutrition seems to fall into place. And your body tells you what you need and what you don't need.

Yeah, that's a good point. Listen to the cues. Those cravings can tell you something. Not only in your training as you're experimenting, but also on race day, they'll tell you maybe what you need. I want to also go back to the point you made, Paul, of doing some prep races for Squamish, whether it be 50K or 25K or 30Ks. Because yes, it's about practicing your nutrition and training, but also practicing on race day where you have aid stations, where you have a set up that will be more like race conditions, so you can kind of practice the logistical side of food as well, potentially with crew members out there helping you out.

Yeah, and it's easy, right, to think that a 20-mile run in training, you could do that without taking on any nutrition. But then try to do that race day. See, it's like, oh my god, I need something.

Yeah, right.

That's always the test, right? How does it go on race day?

Yeah, right.

Because it's a totally different set of conditions. And particularly if you're competitive, right, and you need to surge or you need to match somebody's tempo or, in my case, right, draft off of Chris and stay on his hip.

Yeah, I'm also in marathon training right now, so I'm kind of like trying to prepare myself a little bit more for less food, because as an ultra runner, I'm constant. I'm used to just eating and drinking prolifically when I run long, and I don't need to do that, so I'm kind of like trying to adapt to this very specific training.

And what's cool, Wright has been reading some of the CIM, just race reports, Wright, of those that punch their qualifying ticket. And then Wright watching Kip Jogge at Berlin, right, taking his bottles at a very, very frequent basis. I think they're taking it more frequently than they used to historically at the elite level of marathoners, right? And they're running for two hours, right? Almost two hours or just above two hours. But they're taking in, right, small doses at higher frequencies than they used to.

Yeah, that's important. It can make or break your race, as we alluded to. So as we wrap this episode, hopefully those, including me, who might be thinking about trail or signed up for their first trail, have a few more tips. Final messages for the new ultra runner out there. Any final things that we didn't cover? I'll start with you, Jason.

I will just go back to, for me, the key point is to remember that it's going to be, like your training, your race strategy is going to be specific to you and kind of your lifestyle, your racing style. But remember that your long runs, all that time on the trail, it's a laboratory. You're constantly experimenting, and so enjoy the short runs on the trail. Disconnect, which is kind of our common theme in the case for the trail, but treat those long runs as your key to glory.

Yeah, right on. Eat and drink whatever makes you feel and run fast. My freshman year rowing coach said that. It's like, hey, coach, what do we eat before a race? Whatever makes you feel fast. Right. And if that doesn't work, seek professional help. Get advice. Find a good dietician that knows their stuff. And yeah, because you may just be allergic or have sense, have sensitivities to certain things that might be challenging to figure out. So you could waste your time, right? Just chasing your tail on that for a long time. But in some cases, seek professional help.

The final thing I will add is that on race day, solve those problems and just keep moving forward. I think a lot of it comes back to the mental side, which we didn't really talk about, which is to say, look, once you start at that starting line, you're resolved to get to the finish and do whatever you need to do, problem solving wise, to get there. And really that problem solving starts even before that in training. But just keep moving forward as my now five year old daughter keeps telling me for some odd reason.

Just keep moving forward.

Squamish 50 is coming up. It'll be here before you know it.

Keep moving forward, daddy.

And put it in the binder.

Exactly. So there you go. Well, thank you guys for joining me, Paul and Jason again. This has been fascinating, and I've got some homework to do in building my binder for Squamish next year. And we'll keep you guys posted on my journey to that race as we go. For those that want to follow along. Of course, thanks to everybody for listening. This has been episode 105 of the Running Rogue podcast. As always, you can check us out at roguerunning.com. Or follow us on Instagram, Twitter, or Facebook at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.