Hey everybody, welcome to episode 333 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung. And I'm excited about today's episode because we're bringing on a long time member of the Rogue community here in Austin to talk about his story, starting from scratch five years ago building into his running journey to now dreaming of things that are much bigger. And so we're going to talk about building belief in him for those goals that are still ahead of him. His name is Dan Wiersema and James Dodds as his coach, James will be joining as well for this conversation. So we'll get to that in just a second. First want to thank my sponsors for this episode, John G and Better Help. Run John G has now been a partner of mine for about six months, really loving their apparel. I just recently got temperatures cool enough here in Austin to try their Merino long sleeve tea and absolutely love it. It probably wasn't quite cold enough yet, but I went for it anyway. John G is a running apparel company that makes amazing functional apparel that also gives back to great causes. Two percent of all revenue goes to support water projects all around the world. Plus through their designs and colors, they celebrate countries and artists from all over the world. So go check out their stuff at runjohng.com and get 15 percent off using my code Rogue 15 R-O-G-U-E 1-5 for 15 percent off your order. Go check it out. So thanks to Run John G. And of course, mid episode, I'll be talking about my other sponsor for this episode, Better Help. So stay tuned for an offer from them as well. With that, let's jump right into my conversation with James and Dan. Here we go. We are excited to welcome Rogue athlete, Dan Wiersema to the show, and I'm going to let James, your coach, give you a proper introduction. But first, just how are you today?

I'm great. Honestly, I'm honored you guys had me on. You could have had the winner of the Chicago Marathon world record holder. But instead you asked me on and that really just means a lot.

He was busy this morning, but was going to make time for us. And so instead we chose you first. We said, look, we'll get to you later. Got to talk to Dan first. So excited to have you on, excited to share your story, Dan. I'm going to throw it to James, who's joining me for this episode as well, your coach. And he's going to give a quick intro. James, what do we need to know about Dan before we really get to know him?

There's a lot to know about Dan, and I hope he tells... I truly want to let him tell most of the story, but I would almost rather pivot a little bit and say, you put all this content out there, and I think all of your listeners are consistently thinking, like, oh, this is a tip that I learned that now I apply in training and I can get a little bit better. And then you multiply that times a thousand, you have all these different applications and improvements and experiences that athletes have. And I think there are so many Rogue stories that are rich and full of meaning. And Dan and I actually talk about this. The idea of the podcast even came about specifically with Dan because he represents someone that's completely different than two or three other athletes in my group. And I know that that represents a microcosm across Rogue. You have a variety of different personalities. Paul's got a variety of different personalities. Kathy's got a variety of different personalities. And yet everyone's experiencing these similar life changes. They have their times that they improve within the marathon or the half marathon. But then they also start applying some of the things that they learn within running to other facets of their life and without giving away any of the story or even shaping Dan's story. I just think this is a cool opportunity to hear from someone who I've grown very close to over the past, what is it, three years, four years now, Dan? How long have you been training? Five years, gosh, that's wild. Time really, really flies.

Minus a few hiccups here and there between the pandemic and Boise.

Yeah, yeah.

Well, that's five years of someone, I think, first coming into Rogue, as someone often does. And it's like, hey, I'm here to train and I wanna finish a half. And now it's like, we've raced before when we shouldn't have raced, like on a Friday morning on an easy run. And it's like, I could actually keep up with you and now you're a guy I wouldn't even try to do track work with. And I just think your story is really impressive and I'm trying to touch on it from the high level because I don't wanna give any away of your details. I want you to be able to tell your own story. But you represent someone who I think is just... I think of like, part of my coaching theme is like narrative and epic journeys. And I steal from Joseph Campbell who talks about the hero's journey where the hero sets out on this epic adventure and they've got this really great idea and they wanna do something special and it means something to them, but they face trial and tribulation and they have those downturns or you know this language, the dark nights of the soul. And it's like, you go through that and on the other side, the story you tell, you're like, I wouldn't wish that upon anyone, but yet at the same time, how could I possibly be this strong without having gone through that, right? And you have that all within your story. So yeah, I freaking wanna get into it. How about that for an intro, Chris?

That was the least intro intro of all time.

I was gonna say, you just put me at the center of the Iliad.

So-

Come on, Homer.

At the very highest level, Dan joined Rogue five years ago, trains with the Rogue Evening Edition, which is James' in-person, James and Jacob's in-person group that meets on Wednesday night at Rogue and on Saturday mornings. So that's the full context. He's had five years of working with us in person and is still learning and evolving and dreaming of big goals. So we wanna get through that journey. So I want you to take us back five years, Dan. What was the impetus for you deciding to join Rogue?

Man, it was a confluence of a lot of things. I was a soccer player for a long time, but I honed my craft as the goalie, so I didn't have to move as much. So it's not like I was a runner previously, but I had a pretty bad knee injury playing soccer here in Austin and really kind of just fell into nothing, right? And so I put on a fair amount of weight. I'm a big guy, I'm 6'3 already, so I could kind of hide it in a lot of spaces and pretend that it wasn't an issue, but I just didn't like how I felt, and it was a hard spot. And then we had my son, Jack, in 2016, and I'll tell you what, when you have to try to keep up with a kid, a two-year-old, it starts to really hit you that the lifestyle that you've led just probably isn't gonna work, right? Longevity or even short-term energy to chase a toddler or whatever. And my wife, she ran some rogue races and has always been a pretty active person, and I think for a long time gave me a pass and had been lovingly trying to push me in a certain direction. And for my birthday, I guess it was August 2018, she got me an Apple Watch. And I would say that's not a not so subtle hint about moving forward. And she said, I think honestly, and this is not an infomercial for Rogue, but she was like, I think you need to join a running group. You need a team, right? You need a community. And she's like, I remember how fun some of the Rogue events had been that she had run in and whatnot. She's like, I think that's your place. And serendipitously, surprised I got that word out, but Wednesday's happened to be my free night between her work when she was a principal. And so I plopped in a Wednesday evening edition and started moving this long-haul trucker of a body week after week and listening to James and Jaygar walking through what it meant to kind of, I guess, reboot the system, right? And yeah, ran the 3M half in 2019. And James happened to actually, he's a kind of like a guardian angel, but was at the starting line. I was planning on running it solo, ran into a couple of other Union editioners, and then I was asked, hey, James, what are you running today? And he's like, I don't know, I'm just out there to have fun, like he always is. And I was like, well, can I tag along? And he held my hand to a sub two debut. So I'll take that, and along the way, lost a few pounds, lost quite a few pounds, actually. And I'll tell you what, still chasing your kid is tiring though. That's actually not the right why for runners.

It doesn't get, it doesn't necessarily get easier. It doesn't. It just evolves. But I want to go back though. I want to go back to first your wife's comment about, about you needing a team and a community. I think it's interesting that comment, especially because as someone who grew up playing team sports, soccer, I grew up playing team sports, it leaves a big hole in you when you get out of that environment because it is such a source of community and friendship and being pushed and challenged by others. So I'm curious as to that transition from even pre-running and having that team sport environment to not, what was missing for you?

Yeah, you know, it's interesting. I've always been scared of running, even when I was a soccer player, right? Which is why I was a goalie. I did a year of track in high school, and it wasn't super fun to me. I was really nervous. I didn't get a lot of enjoyment out of it, even though my coach was licking his chops over my long legs. But I didn't go that route. I was the girl's soccer manager. But I've always been scared of running because it felt isolated, right? That you'd kinda get out on a run or a workout or whatever, and particularly getting stuck with thoughts in your head. And so not only were you alone, but you were being chased by something in your head. And it's just crazy because I wish, you talk about going back in time and telling yourself these sorts of things, but you have to learn them. I couldn't think of a more community-based thing. It's a much stronger community than any soccer team I ever played for, right? It's much more welcoming and way less lonely. I mean, again, for the goalie, when they're on the other side of the field trying to score goals, I mean, talk about being alone. I mean, there's a reason the kids start picking dandelions off the field. But it's kind of ironic to think about how much different my stereotype of running was than the reality of it. And I think all of my closest friends have come from Evening Edition. And it's just really shocking because everybody's in it for each other. And it doesn't have to be backslaps and whatever, it's Strava kudos and all those sorts of things, but there's just this aura, especially around the community that James and Jacob have created in Evening Edition, that we're all just rooting for each other. I think it's really special. And it's been what's sustained me through every good time and certainly held me up through a lot of the more frequent, probably the runs that are a lot harder, right? Those come a lot more than the good runs.

Well, and I want to jump in there too, because as further context, I think of you as a pretty successful marketing guy as well. Like you have a cool career and you're someone I will go to for advice when it comes to that. But at that time, I'm fairly certain you would either, and share only to the degree that you're comfortable, but it wasn't just even your fitness and everything. I brought up the quote, dark nights of the soul, because that was the very first book I gave you. It was like, and I didn't plan that. I don't do that with all my athletes. You just came in and you had been laid off. And I know that that's a blow, because you're a really hard worker and you're a very gifted communicator and you're skilled and talented at the specific type of marketing that you do. So to be laid off, you were coming to the table, I think, with other aspects floating in your mind as well. So the degree to which you're comfortable with that, you don't have to share company names, et cetera. I know you were carrying some of that mentally, and perhaps that's why you didn't want to go on a solo run and talk to Dan alone about those dark and scary thoughts, right?

No, I mean, and truth be told, just for transparency, I lost my job twice in the span of three years, you know? And so, yeah, the second time, by the time I was kind of, that had happened actually after my first half, my second half, I had lost my job. So I'd already started with Rogue and all of that, and then I lost it a second time. And so, yeah, I mean, I was already carrying a lot of things about body positivity and health and longevity and all of that, and trying to start new and then kind of hit a hiccup, about nine months into Rogue. And so, yeah, I mean, there was a whole lot of things to work out, but turns out, again, we think of community as like positivity and whatnot. But what you realize out in a lot of long runs is that everybody's working through stuff, right? We're all humans, we're all multidimensional, we've got good days and bad, and we all need to talk through some stuff. Well, some people are quieter than others. I don't know who those people are, but. You know, but yeah, I mean, I think what you realize is that you're, again, you're not alone, right? We have stuff that we need to process and talk and finding the right people to be able to think about that. There's so many runs I've gone out on with a certain thought and then, you know, finished with a completely different one because there's been people to help you kind of work through all that. It's really quite special.

Yeah, that's the powerful thing about that in person opportunity. I mean, I don't think there's any other place in the world where you can interact device free with people for that many hours, that much time than on a long run. And I also like to say that there are no masks at 5:30 a.m. when you're running 20 miles. So you're also getting the purest, most authentic rawest form of each other, which makes it even more powerful. So I'm glad that that could be a cathartic space. But take me back to the first time stepping in to the evening edition, showing up for the first time. I know James is particularly good about integrating people, but what were you feeling? What was that like?

Man, well, that was back when Rogue had a bar. So that felt, that was great. Right, yeah, I was like, oh man, like, I don't even know. I had never actually been inside the Rogue building before. And so, you know, and even just, you know, that was again, the coffee shop and the Takeda-dele tacos and whatnot in the morning. And so, you know, you're hittin on all my loves there. You know, I said this kind of earlier, like, you know, James and Jacob really set the tone for the group. I think, you know, again, the coaches, you know, these groups are outgrowths of them personally and professionally. And, you know, and I've watched this for five years now, right, I've watched James welcome runners for five years now, you know, like, what are you training for? What's your favorite color? Hopefully, it's blue.

There's a right answer on my team to that question.

And so, you know, and in hindsight, right, he shows the same level of enthusiasm for every single person that walks in that door. And, you know, but that same level of enthusiasm makes you feel like the most important person, you know, for that day and all of that, and so the attention that, you know, and the focus and the kind of like, you know, I'm here to help you, I'm, you know, a servant leadership is just has been super refreshing. And I think, you know, that translates to everybody else in that group. And, you know, the evening edition group has gone through a lot of changes in these five years, right? I'm now the oldest runner in the group, or at least the oldest regular runner in the group. And whereas I was still kind of in, you know, in the older years, but there were other folks there. And, you know, there's so there's a sense of responsibility to kind of pay it forward to what I got when I came aboard that I feel really deeply, you know, assistant to the regional manager sort of approach.

I love that. But what were you expecting as far as like, if we go back to just like X's and O's, were you like, oh, this is this class, my wife thinks I should do and I'll get like a 30 minute workout or what kind of what was the viewpoint coming in expectations wise and just with the X's and O's?

Yeah, I mean, I guess, I guess in my head, I was just like, I was going to show up and, and you know, like, okay, well, what do you want to do? Just get out there and go start running, man, you know, like get out there and with a like a kind of not like in a bad way, like a boot to the butt and, and, and just go find some miles. Right. I honestly didn't know, right? Cause Anna, you know, my wife was like, I think this is the community, right? She felt that from from Rogue. And, and so in my, I think that there was skepticism, right? You know, like again, you're coming from this team sport mentality to what feels like an individual sport. Um, and so I guess I would say that there's, you know, a level of skepticism that I would find, you know, both my footing, right? Again, my, you know, I'm a bigger guy and, um, you know, with some, some tough knees. And so I was kind of rolling the dice on, on giving this opportunity. So I came in with a healthy bit of skepticism, both for my ability to accomplish what I wanted to accomplish, which I think was just to get to, I guess, the starting line of 3M and then hopefully the finish line as well. Um, but I would say that, you know, it quickly went away. Um, you know, like, I think we, I quickly felt that this was a place that was gonna allow me to, to do more than just put one foot in front of the other. Um, but yeah, I mean, I came in and I was super skeptical. I think, you know, people view running as this thing that, um, I mean, it's difficult, right? Like, just being an athlete, right? I've never really considered myself an athlete. Chris, I've, you know, I, I know you've been pretty successful on the soccer field, um, and whatnot, but, uh, I have not. I wouldn't say that I'm, I've, I've, I've, I've always joked. I've been about as average of a, a basketball and, and soccer player as, as, as I possibly could be. And so like excelling in something is not necessarily like something I walk into, right? I don't walk in saying like, well, I've played soccer before. So, and the only, the injury held me back. It was always like, yeah, you know, like you want me in my softball team? I can bat 200. You want me on your soccer team? I'll keep the majority of the goals out. You want me on your basketball team? Actually, you don't. I think, you know, I didn't walk in with a lot of confidence that I would, that I would, I think I thought that I could do it. I just didn't know the how. And again, that's, I think, you know, learning to run is just as much about finding the confidence to accomplish it as it is the physical ness to be able to get across to the finish line.

And how did that confidence evolve over those first six months?

You know, it's funny, I mean, this sounds extraordinarily vain, but I lost a fair amount of weight pretty quickly, which I think was just a little bit surprising. I started at Rogue at about 240 pounds. Like I said, I'm a bit of a long haul trucker, so I still am. But I, so that was, I think that was surprising. And that was a real confidence boost because I had, you know, for, for numerous years, you know, put on a lot of weight and felt uncomfortable and, and all that. I worked for a brewery for a while and that didn't help when I was not moving around as much. And so, you know, I think that was one of the first things that really was kind of like a, a physical representation of progress. You know, I think you just even the idea of like learning like the right shoes to wear or the right length shorts. You know, I think my first pair was a little too long. So, and we joke about another runner who had even longer ones. So I feel like I'm making progress there.

I mean, if it was Courtney DeWalter, it can work for anybody.

Absolutely. Yeah, no. I mean, it's just so, you know, it was a real confidence boost. And, you know, to be able to, again, kind of, you know, just again, really vain, vain wise, like lose some weight. But then again, you lose some weight and you, you know, then surprisingly that reinforces your ability to kind of pick it up elsewhere. And I even remember early on, just as a sidebar, I was talking to James and I was like, man, you know, Wednesdays and Saturdays are really tough, you know, like we do a workout on Wednesdays, then you go and do a long run on Saturdays. And I was like, this, I'm getting beat up. And he's like, I know this is going to sound radical, but I think you need to run more. And he's like, have you tried something called an easy run? Right? Because really Wednesdays, you're running hard, and Saturdays you're running long. So where else, where are you kind to yourself in running? And I remember the introduction of the easy run, and that being a real radical shift to building fitness. And I think honestly, being kind to myself in the process.

The magic of those easy recovery runs. It's the glue that holds it all together.

It really is.

In that first season, how many days were you running, or how many days did you build to?

So, you know, it was for the first month or so, it was two. You know, again, we were raising, it was two, so I was getting some extra miles and chasing my son around. But yeah, I mean, I think I only got up to three days a week for that first half. You know, but then it was, you know, by 2019 and then into 2020 when we all had a little bit more flexibility. You know, it was four, four days a week, five days a week, if it felt like I needed to get out of the house and do something. So, you know, and that was just kind of like, it just felt really comfortable to be able to get out there and put more miles on, both as a distraction, but also as something that it felt like success, or at least, you know, the fitness and the enjoyment of running just kind of snowballed into the want to run more.

Take us into that first half, 3M, James paced you, sub two. I mean, that's a great result, right? How did that feel? What was that finish line experience like?

It was incredible. I mean, I think I realized running was a real social sport when I saw how easy it was for James to talk to the dozens of folks that he saw along the course, right? I was like, first off, the idea of being able to talk and run at the same time was a real foreign concept to me, which I think is the real sign of my fitness. I've joked a couple of times now that I probably would have qualified for Boston by now if I could just stop talking and just take that energy and put it into my running. But I think a lot of folks get to the end of their first race, and there's two sometimes competing ideas like, I never want to do this again, or when do we go next? And just getting to the finish line, I really didn't know what I wanted to do next. I just knew that I wanted to keep running. I actually did another half that was really rough. I went out to Hill Country and just got absolutely clobbered a couple of months later. So that was interesting to have such a euphoria of finishing my first half and getting to the finish line of what was the original objective when I joined Rogue September to January. And then a couple of months later, really pretty early feel the agony of defeat. But I think both of them left me thinking that there was more. There was more that my body had to give, right? And there was more for me to accomplish. I didn't jump into marathon training right away. I know some people are like, well, I've done a half. What does times two look like? I kind of wanted to... I spent a lot of time. I said that I really wanted to fall in love with running after that first half, right? I did the work, but now I wanted to kind of love the work. And it took all the way through the pandemic for me to really create a strong affinity for running. And I think, again, that was fueled a lot by the folks that we could find doing the backdoor jogging dip during the pandemic on the other side. And I think, James, you and I were probably doing that four-mile route, what, two or three times a week when you came back. Anytime we could, I think, yeah. Yeah, it was just we, I mean, that was, just as a quick aside, I know you were talking about my first half, but just the idea of how much I craved, I think we all did, seeing people. But seeing people, at this point, the weird, the ironic thing is that for someone who is so afraid of being alone with running, during those two years or so, year and a half, that we were kind of all separated, it really was the only place that I saw people, right? And I think it just, they became symbiotic, you know, running and being with people and community.

I think it's interesting that you talk about the idea of falling in love with running itself and not taking time. I highly relate to that. It took me probably four or five years to actually enjoy the activity of running after I started. So what for you did that look like? How did it evolve to that point of saying, hey, I actually enjoy just doing this for the sake of doing it?

I mean, dad's always jokes about this, but I had the longest commute to the jogging dip of anybody. So we run those Friday. I'm sure James has talked about it quite extensively on the podcast, but at four miles around Barton Springs in a swim. I live out in Maynard. It's about a 25-minute drive for a four-mile run. So I have a longer commute than the run itself. And then I do the same thing down to Saturday, but the runs are longer. But I think when running becomes routine, that's a part of my love language. You know, I'm both pretty gregarious and whatnot, but I also am someone who craves regularity and predictability. I like to plan ahead. And so I think when it kind of came this like, especially during marathon training, right, it's on the spreadsheet, it gets done, right? And I think there's just a real no excuses sort of, this is a part of my life now, which means then it's love, right? When it is a, well, you know, it's time for the 22, right? I spent the last week on vacation with my family in Yellowstone, and we got home at about 1030 at night on Saturday, and Sunday morning, I was out getting my long run done. You know, like, there's just, that's love. You know, checking the boxes and making it a part of your life. And then also the other people in your life, being able to, you know, my wife is very accommodating of that schedule. And so that's really, I think, a big part of how I know I'm in love with running, because it's just an automatic part of what I do.

It's also a testament to the fact that motivation and desire follows action. You know, sometimes we have, we want to do something before we do it. Sometimes that happens. Sometimes it doesn't. And I think with running, whether it be, you think about it on a macro level like you're talking about, or even on a micro level, or people say, I don't want to run today, I'm just not into it. If you actually just do it, then you get into it and you're like, oh, actually, I'm enjoying it. I mean, I think about it this morning. I didn't really want to go run at 7 a.m. But I did. And of course, the temperatures made it actually perfect today. But motivation follows action, and that's true in running, but it's also true in other things. So let's get to what was next. Obviously, you did that second half didn't go as well. That was early 2019. You had a year before the pandemic kicked in, where we got racing taken away from us. What did you do in that year?

So right before the pandemic, well, I did two more halves. I did the Richmond fall, a fall half, and a PR there. So I got back on the horse, like a 147, and then I did 3M again before the world shut down and a PR again. It was a 144. So I had a nice wind at my back. And then it was just, you just went out, right? You just went out because you didn't have anything to do. And I think a lot of people faced a really tough choice, right? Like why run if there are no races, right? Or just get out and JFR, right? Get out there and do something, do something with yourself. Because I think for me, I knew what my body and my mind would be like if I didn't run, right? I'd already been there before. I'd been through those dark places. I had gotten to a place where I knew that this was something that I needed mentally and physically. And so I just signed up for a lot of those virtual races. I think like a lot of people did. I wouldn't say that the races themselves were the most, like, I needed them, but they were nice. I also am a knickknack collector, so all the t-shirts and dumb medals that they gave out for that, where they felt like little badges or little treats. But I also took up trail running, and that was super fun. That was really neat, because again, as someone with, well, I don't have an ACL in my left knee hardly at all, so that was a bit dangerous. Again, I'm not a big risk taker, but trail running felt like that. And I got a lot of enjoyment out of that. It really, really was... I've lived in Austin for 15 years now, and I don't think that I really enjoyed Austin until I had to run the streets of it. Which I know is probably a shocking thing to say for people who love Austin, but I just didn't understand the city, and now I do. And now I actually know where Terrytown is and whatnot. But I think trail running was interesting too, because again, I kind of enjoyed camping and liked being outdoors, but I don't think I fell in love with outdoors until I attached it to running. And so trail running was a big piece of that in the Rogue Trail series. There was a Sky Island they moved to McKinney Ruffs. And that was really exciting because I think it felt like it was a different dimension, because I wasn't quite ready to jump into the marathon pool yet, right? And there weren't even marathons to run. But trail running felt like I had found a cheat code to running. Some of the trail races, actually, when things started opening up again, they allowed them to happen because there weren't 10,000 people, 20,000 people. You know, you could get a couple hundred people, and we'd all get lost in the woods, and there wasn't that risk or whatever. So that felt like a way to really access, I think, a stronger challenge than just road running.

And you were doing 30K, you were doing the 30K series. And so it's not like, you know, you were on your feet for quite a while. And he buried this lead a little bit. But when he said he was doing the work, Dan ran multiple 20-milers. He was doing, I don't want to rush to the marathon story, but he was putting in more miles than some of our marathon runners. But meanwhile, they were talking trash, like, oh, you only do halves. And by no means am I saying, quote, someone only does halves. This is the narrative that was floating where guys are just picking at each other. And yeah, you were putting in 20-mile long runs, 18-mile long runs, running the 30K Trail Series, which is 18.6 miles. But given that it's trail, you're out there on your feet for longer than like a road 20-mile.

Yeah, I was, I mean, I was essentially doing everything but a marathon. And again, like, there just weren't any, you know, at that point. But I did come out of the pandemic knowing I was ready to put in that work. You know, that there was another thing there for me to kind of go after.

So tell us about it. What was the first marathon?

So I did Houston. You know, keep it local, keep it nearby. And a bunch of us did Houston. So that would have been 2022, Houston 2022. And so like a lot of folks, and I mean, again, it's for us here in Austin, right? It's right down the road. It's flat. It's relatively quick. And, you know, that was, you know, it was a real serious talk with James because he was like, you know, you've got your kid and you've got your job, and you're focused on making sure you keep this one and all of that. And, you know, like this is going to ask a lot of you, right? It's going to ask more of you and time and energy and all of that than you've ever done before. So, you know, five days a week of running the, you know, I think the toughest part is getting used to that, you know, that Saturday long run and flip it around for a MLR, which apparently refers to the medium long run and not the Monday long run, as I thought. But so, and it was just an incredible experience. You know, I was lucky enough to have so many folks in our Wednesday group pushing towards Houston. You know, that felt like I wasn't doing it alone. It felt like I wasn't doing my, you know, I was doing my first marathon, but I wasn't the only marathoner. And then, you know, I came out and debuted with a 337. So I felt pretty good about that. And it just really had kind of shown, you know, that it's funny too, because like then, you know, we did Houston 2023, and there were a few less folks doing that. And, you know, I ran Houston 2022 with two friends, like, and they kind of just were the pacers and the timekeepers and the encouragement and all of that. So it was nice to kind of have some folks kind of guiding you by the elbows. But, you know, in 2023, I ran it all by myself, right? And I think that's been a really interesting thing. I trained a lot by myself for the second one. The first one was a lot more community based. The second one was a lot more solo miles, you know, and learning to be able to succeed when you're by yourself is, I think, another big test, right? To go from thinking you were alone and then having the community support you and then the times where you actually have to, you're in your own training cycle or in your own race, be comfortable with being alone, I think, is a huge growth, right? The thing that I feared the most actually comes true, and yet now I'm not afraid of it.

How did the 23 race go?

So, you know, it was crazy. The 2022, we had those gorgeous 35 degrees at the start, and it just, that one just flew by. But then 2023 was, I think, what, 55 degrees at the start. So it's quite the contrast, and it finished.

It warmed up.

It warmed up. Yeah, and it warmed up real quick. And it was, I remember we were, you know, I had eyeballed a 330, so a seven-minute PR, and Dodds said, you know, the night before, he was like, this is going to be hard for a lot of people in this room to hear, because we had a little, we had a team dinner, and he's like, but I need everybody to start thinking about adjusting your paces by at least five minutes, right? Like, I know you all have had a number in your head, right? And he's like, and I know we love chasing those numbers and those times. And he's like, but you need to be safe, right? You need to continue to push yourself and ask yourself, but, you know, hopefully that five minutes still gives you the PR. And so, you know, I adjusted, and my watch actually didn't work that race, so there was a lot of field base running, and I ended up with a 332. So I cut five minutes off, and James has said that he thinks it would probably have been a 328, which is, you know, on a good day or whatever. So, you know, it was tough, though. You know, again, like, you're running by yourself, you're doing those rolling hills in the final kind of six miles or whatever. It was a slog. I'm glad I adjusted. I'm glad I listened to my coach.

I was at mile 26. Like, I was as far as I could be, and he came by, though, just screaming, racing. Like, big smile, big high five and gone. Like, I saw him a second. That was it.

You were closing. I was in another place for that final mile. I didn't hear my wife or really anybody. Apparently, there were several people that shouted my name. But yeah. But yeah, now I'm on to Philly. I've got Philly in about a month and a week. So this will be my third marathon and the second one of 2023. And I'll tell you what, you know, each marathon has gotten a little lonelier. The training block. I've been lucky enough to catch some long runs with some really great people, but this is definitely the loneliest of the training blocks that I've done now. And it's been hard.

Take us back to the first marathon.

Sure.

Quickly. What was that finish line like? Especially when I'm sure you reflected on how far you had come at that point.

Yeah, I mean, it was crazy because it's like the pace that I was running for a full, right, was infinitely quicker than what I had done my first half at, right? And I think, you know, even just looking at this training block now and what I'm trying to do, it's just like, it seems really incomprehensible that you can go from running a pace for a half and then take that and build yourself to that. That's now your full pace, right? That just kind of continues to blow my mind as to how the body can continue to grow and learn and push. And what seemingly felt like limits five years ago, or the limit is merely a bus stop along the way. I mean, I felt incredible. I felt like I had a lot left in the tank. After the first one, the last 10K was... I remember it was one of those things where you're like, oh, well, if you don't feel tired at the end, you didn't run hard enough. And I remember telling myself, I had a very specific goal and a very specific pace, and I wanted to, again, much like I did with the half, is I didn't want to hate the marathon. I wanted to run my first marathon and know I could do it and accomplish it and come away with an affection for that race versus doing something dumb or crazy or overly ambitious, blowing up and then being like, well, I've been doing this for five years, and now I just went and messed up this distance. And so I was happy to be able to walk literally off the course. And again, I think the motivation was then to come back the next year and say, okay, well, you had something left last year. What would it look like if you had less left the next time around? And certainly the heat answered part of that equation for me. But it was, you know, it was super satisfying. It was more satisfying than the half, just because, you know, it's twice the distance, and it's kind of the gold standard of running, it feels like, to finally, and you know, as James joked before, finally put to rest all of the bullies in evening edition. No, I'm just kidding. I'm just kidding bullies. But, you know, to do that, right? But then to come away with knowing that there was actually a lot more strength inside of me, right? I think that was, I think, the biggest confidence boost. I ran with one of my closest friends who I grew up in Wisconsin with. Him and his girlfriend ran the race with me, and I always looked up to him as a really strong runner, and to be fair, he had run a full marathon a couple of months earlier. But I absolutely kicked his tail at the end of the first Houston. I ran off with his girlfriend, quite literally. And so it was satisfying. And we're running Philly together again, and hopefully he doesn't have revenge because I need them to pace me. But it was extraordinarily satisfying. And again, that love and appreciation is so important to me, right? To bake that in, it's a huge part of my motivation.

So now you're hearing up for Philly, what's the goal?

The goal is... Well, it's kind of all over the... I mean, it's not all over the place, but there's a window. I think we're looking at about a 325, James, is that what we said? 320 to 325?

We stayed true to that data point. We did the math. Like, Chris, I got it from you. It's like I waited to hear from you, and then I gave the numbers to my team, and I still stand by it. Those that PR'd, I was like, you know, I know what it means to you to have the number on the clock. Very much so. But as far as training cases were concerned, we operated with 328 going forward and then set goals from there. It was like, I still want you to have your experience of, quote, 328, but you're in 328 shape, you recover, we hit the next training cycle using those training paces. No emotion about it. That's your... He earned that training pace.

So, yeah, we're looking at a 325. It's kind of where we're netting out what I've been training at. This is my first summer block. So trying to figure out what is and what isn't possible when the weather is literally as oppressive as it is here has been really humbling. I think this has been... I think every summer runner can tell you this, right? You know, or whatnot, and so I think there's a real humbling to this. I mean, again, my 22 yesterday was... even though it was 55 at the start, I got a late start. It was 75 at the finish, and those last six miles were some of the hardest. James has been around for a lot of the ends of my runs, including my 20 with that really mean workout that you all put in the other day with the 5Ks on and off and all that. So I've been humbled quite a bit recently.

He's referring to the McClung special, by the way. He got a taste of that two weeks ago, Chris, of your magic.

Yeah. And I saw Chris on that run. He was working the water stops, and I was really kind to you, but I'll tell you what, there were some very unkind words in my head when I saw you there. Surely we've all cursed your name before, whether it be the Lucky McClung or anything else. But yeah, it's been a real humbling cycle, and my wife joked, she's like, I'm really glad you guys are doing the podcast today because I think you could use a little therapy. I have had these elements of doubt creep into me about whether or not what I've set out to do is possible. I'm 41 now, and like I said, I'm a long haul trucker. And the paces that I want right now, they seem ambitious. They seem realistic and ambitious at the same time. James has done a good job of, again, using the science to set something. I'm not a Boston guy, even if I stop talking, let's be honest. But I think it certainly has, after yesterday, made me want it as bad as I've ever wanted it, but also worried that unless I get a 35 degree day again, if I'm capable of it.

Hold on, you said you're not a Boston guy?

Yeah.

I knew Chris wasn't going to let you get away with that. He's not going to let you get away with that.

What do you mean by that?

Are you referring to someone who's incapable of qualifying for the Boston Marathon?

Is that what you're referring to? Did I send up a flare there? Because I have a feeling you can say anybody's capable of it.

I mean, you know what happens in probably two and a half years for you, right?

Do you know what happens?

Your standard becomes 320.

Yeah.

45 to 49 is 320. You're already talking about 320 to 325 now. So to outright say you're not a Boston guy is pretty absurd, frankly, because you're going to have two and a half years of work to get even further than 320.

I think, I mean, I kind of say that jokingly. I also said I wasn't a marathoner. So, you know, nobody loves the sandbag himself more than I do. And I mean that kind of facetiously, but like, you know, I guess when I say I'm not a Boston guy or I'm not a marathoner, or maybe I'm not even a 755 or whatever, I think the pace breaks down to for Philly is, I think part of it is just like kind of trying to protect myself. Right. I really want to stay here. Right. And in this moment. So it doesn't do me a whole lot to think. Well, heck, you know, like Boston. And again, I've joked with my wife, like, Boston by 55. It's more of the, you know, and but I think the reality is, is like, I'm despite the moment being uncomfortable, particularly right now in this Philly training block, I'd much rather stay here and do that. Then then think about any sort of the other ones like that. So, yeah.

Well, that's being present is fine. But even jokingly saying something's not possible is a way of programming your brain to believe it. And so words matter. And I'm not going to let you get away with casual comments like that because, look, you don't have to want to go to Boston. Nobody does. That is a worthy goal, but it is not a goal you have to have. But to say you can't do it, I'm not going to allow that. Because you absolutely can, 100%. I mean, it's just a matter of continuing to do the work and continuing to see the progress you're seeing. And so if that's something you want, then absolutely we can get it. But we need to make sure that we don't put the seeds of doubt in our own brain.

From your lips to my ears. But it's true.

I understand the self-deprecation and the humor of it. I get that. But those are real words that are at some level believed inside your brain, even if it's subconscious. And part of getting the best of yourself is programming your brain the other direction.

James and I have talked about this quite a bit, where I feel like one of my greatest impediments really is the mental fortitude. I think a couple weeks ago, there was a particularly gnarly... Well, they've all been gnarly. There hasn't been one that hasn't been. But I think I'm in a better physical shape than I've ever been. And yet, you're still fighting a lot of the thoughts, and this is not an uncommon thing for any runner. But is your brain telling you not to push harder because you just don't want to put yourself into any sort of space, and not physical pain or anything, but to really push yourself? And I think, again, the self-deprecating or building these sort of artificial barriers in our heads of speed or races or whatever is, I think, one of my bigger challenges, and I think the biggest challenge that I faced in this cycle in particular. Again, I knew when I headed into my first marathon that there was no, well, man, I hope I finish. I knew I was going to finish. I had no doubt about that I had the physical ability to do it. And then the second one was like, well, yeah, you've been here before and you've trained through this. So there was a lot less unpredictability. And I also really felt comfortable that I could beat my time, you know, from the first Houston. But, you know, this second marathon cycle this year, plus the summer, I think has been the more mentally challenging than it has been physically. And that's where I think my biggest worry comes in is whether or not I have the mental fortitude to accomplish what I want to. I think, for the most part, physically I could do it, but whether or not I'm willing to get uncomfortable is where I think my head is stuck at and where we can kick off this therapy session.

All right, James and I don't provide therapy. We provide coaching, but that's a perfect segue to talk about my sponsorship with better help. Do you ever find yourself trying to fall asleep or perhaps get on task with work and you just can't stop thinking about a thing that you're dealing with or a challenge in your life? Well, it turns out one great way to work through those thoughts and anxieties and fears that might come in any situation is through therapy. Therapy gives you a place to talk through it and to get you out of those negative thought cycles so that you can find some mental and emotional peace. Personally, I've benefited from therapy a couple of times in my life when dealing with challenging situations where I was having similar racing thoughts. So if you're thinking about starting therapy, I would encourage you to give BetterHelp a try. It's the largest online therapy provider. They are designed to be convenient, flexible, and suited to your schedule. You can literally do therapy from the comfort of your own home via a video screen interaction with the therapist. All you have to do is fill out a brief questionnaire to get matched with a licensed therapist. You can switch therapists at any time, but you will get that help you need. So get a break from your thoughts with BetterHelp. Visit betterhelp.com/runningroguetoday to get 10% off your first month. That's BetterHelp, help.com/runningrogue. Again, that's 10% off your first month. Go check it out. Okay, let's get back to our conversation with Dan. Here we go.

Chris, before you take him through therapy, I want to add, just for context, because he mentioned the physical. This is someone running 14-mile medium long runs on a Monday, 10 miles with his quality on Wednesdays, and did the McClung special two weeks ago. I think finishing in the high 80s, and also the humidity in the high 80s. Goes to Yellowstone last week with families hiking, and then gets home and knocks down 22 miles yesterday before jumping on today. So it's by no means unwilling to do quote the work.

Yeah, I think that's the thing to point to here. You see and experience uncertainty and doubt around your mental fortitude. I only see strength. And again, I'm not your coach. I don't know you as well, but I saw you at the end of Houston in 23. I was in the final mile and a half through there, and that was a brutal day. But you ran amazingly. You were so focused and deliberate about that finish on a really tough day. And so as you said, you were so focused in how strong you were finishing, you weren't even hearing your own name. And so that's evidence of the mental fortitude you can bring to a race. The work you're willing to do is further evidence in these workouts and in the miles. So I understand the uncertainty that a warm summer can bring because you don't get clear indicators of fitness like you do in cooler months. But the indicators are there. You just have to look for them. And so I would say part of what you need to do is just own your strength. It's not about do I have it or do I not have it. It's actually already there. You have evidence of it. It's just a matter of owning that.

I will. No, I mean, no. What makes you hesitate? What makes you pause? You and I are similar folks. And I find it quite shocking that you've actually spoken the least of the three of us here today. I appreciate you giving. I know long-time listeners will probably think, well, James is on, and the combination between the two of us would have been real trouble. But I don't do well with compliments. And I've gotten quite a few of them from James over the years. And hearing that from you, Chris, it really means a lot because I obviously have a lot of respect for you and everything that's been built here. But I don't know. I think it's just tough. I think even to this day, for everything that I have accomplished, just as someone who puts in the work and gets things done, I think it's tough sometimes to come away and be proud. I'm not like a boastful person. And so I think sometimes even when people are objectively paying me compliments or complimenting my progress, it's hard to realize sometimes that I'm here. I don't know. I'm very well aware between the times getting better and the weight loss and the general benefits of having become someone who truly really loves the sport of running. I think it still feels surprising. Success still feels surprising to me. And not that it's not unearned. I know I've earned it. I know I've put in the time. But I think for a lot of things, it's just... I don't know. I almost feel like they should go to somebody else. I don't know why. Well, there's just so many people doing... Yeah, there's so many people doing so many good things out there.

I get it.

I get it. But you are one of them, right? I mean, you can elevate others and elevate yourself in that dialogue. And one of the things I tell my athletes all the time is that if you're looking for inspiration, look no further than your teammates. Because truly, regardless of the person... I could tell a story about every single person that I coach that would inspire others. And that's front of the back, back of the pack, middle of the pack, all over the pack, all sorts of starting points, all sorts of accomplishments encompassed there. But there's inspiration we had across all of those stories. And you see it. I know you see it. You're inspired by your teammates. They're inspired by you. And so it's about just stepping into that and recognizing that you are, you have some done things to be proud of and you've done things to inspire others. So it's time to start believing a different narrative because you started this conversation telling me you're average at soccer and average at basketball and you're average at everything. And I don't know about your soccer ability, but it doesn't matter. You've created this narrative in your head that you're average guy. And what the running is showing us is that you're not in fact average.

I mean, one of the reasons why we attach to those things is because it's familiar. Just like the body seeks homeostasis, psychologically we seek some sense of familiarity. Like you ask, why would someone in abusive relationships ever get into abusive relationships again? And it's largely because they know that. They know that better than any other disposition or mindset. And so I have a lot of conversations with private athletes, one-to-one athletes, and it's one of the reasons why I wanted to talk to you. And I think like this year being a solo training season, it's like, you know, Chris said, look no further than your teammates, and I'll add to look no further than yourself. Not because I'm trying to quote, create narcissist and make you guys egotistical, but also like you got to, when he says own and internalize, that's what I think that this, that's what it looks like, to be like, no, like there is empirical evidence pointing to the fact that I did this, therefore I can do that. And it's like not becoming egotistical by being boastful, but neither becoming egotistical by constant self-deprecation. Like to oversell yourself and to undersell yourself are both forms of the ego and attachment to a sense of familiarity, a mindset that we've grown comfortable in. And I would say that's why I always try to point to the training itself, because you're freaking doing it and you're doing it alone. And I know you mentioned there's been some ebbs and flows and changes with the group. I know one of the alphas you were often able to look up to was B Ward. He's like a 245 guy crushing big mileage and everything. It's like now you're the guy putting up the big miles. I bring in new people, and they feel these intimidating feelings of like, oh my God, I can never do 14-mile medium long runs, etc. And it's like, well, you don't know where Dan started, right?

Well, one of the highest complements I got was I was running with Campbell recently, and he was like, man, I remember when I first started running with B Ward, and I was like, wait, does that make me Campbell and now he's B Ward, even though I'm actually older than him. And if you know any of those runners, they're both bossy qualifiers, which I am not, and never will be, Chris. No, just kidding. But to run side saddle with a guy like Campbell, who then of course was step for step with Brian, and that has been one of the enjoyable pieces. And I know Campbell has gone easy on me a couple of times out there, but he's a dad now too, so that means he's lost the step. And that's actually been one of the real enjoyable pieces of this training cycle is to run with people that you have a lot of respect with and look forward to. And I do take that. I think if there's one thing I can be kinder to myself is that there are a lot of new folks, and even some folks that are faster than me, because we all go our own paces, but to be able to encourage them and let them know that a lot of things are possible when they're just getting started, that part I can own a little bit better, to be the good teammate. And we always say this to my son, is think about how you talk to a friend and talk to yourself that way. I could probably use that lesson from time to time.

Well, absolutely. You do need to actually start complimenting yourself. I mean, it's a real thing. Positive affirmations. I mean, as cheesy as it sounds, your homework is to actually write a list of them. Things that Dan does well. Things that Dan is capable of. And to start saying to yourself every day and post it in a prominent place that you see it all the time because it matters. What we tell ourselves and what we believe in our brain, consciously and subconsciously, affects our ability to perform. So we have to do a little reprogramming.

Yeah, and obviously, the story that we... A lot of folks, whether it be running or work or relationships or whatever, I don't think anybody's harder on ourselves than I think our inner monologues. And they're usually not us anyways. And so I think, again, between professional and running and personal success, I'm telling myself the wrong story. I think whether it be the times or the work or all of that sort of stuff, I know I'm telling myself an inaccurate story.

Yeah, so we need the positive self-talk to change that narrative. And then I also think there's just tactical things about, okay, what happens when I go to these thoughts? Because look, having the thoughts are normal, you're going to continue to have them. Doubts will come and go, that's a part of being human. And I always remind people not to beat yourself up about that part because that's just normal. But then the question is, what do you do when those thoughts come? So having tactics to deflect or to refocus your energy to something that is constructive and positive is what you need to start to practice. And so in this case, relative to Philly, when you have those thoughts of doubt or uncertainty about, well, can I run this pace for that long, then I would say, one, go to your training because all the work you've done in these oppressive summer temperatures has you more prepared than 99% of the people that will be on that start line. So you can lean into that, and then you can lean into execution and planning and what do I need to do mile by mile and what does the course look like, knowing it so that you can take all of that energy and refocus it on something productive. Because what is on the table in front of you is not anything more than you've been trained to do, right? What does the race require? The race requires exactly the work that you've been doing. And all you have to do is go do it. And I like to remind people, you can't run the race all at once, right? We always want to think about how we're going to feel and respond at mile 21 or 24 or 25. And certainly, we should build our tool kit to be ready. But all you got to do is go run one mile. That is literally all that's being asked of you when that start line, or when you hit that start line and when that gun goes off, is just run one mile. And you know you can run one mile at those paces. You know you can run two. You know you can run 10. You don't have to worry about the rest. The rest will be taken care of because you're prepared. So refocus on the positive energy. And when in doubt, if you have nothing else to do, just visualize yourself having success on race day. Because science tells us that neuromuscularly, that actually has similar effect on our bodies and brains as if we're actually doing it. So we'll pause on Philly for a second. I want to go to the long-term goal discussion. Now we mentioned Boston. You joked again that you're not going to ever get there. I let that one slide.

That was a setup for you. I believe I did.

But Boston or not, thinking beyond Philly and without other timelines, what's the biggest dream you have in this sport?

Honestly, the same dream that motivated me at the start of this journey still motivates me now. And it's one of the reasons why I didn't even feel all that compelled to jump into the marathon to begin with. It's really long-term health. I mean, for someone who had put on some weight, I can hike forever, I can run for as long as I want. For the time being, until he gets a little bit older, whatever, I can keep up with my kid. But I want to age gracefully. I really do. And again, for someone who always teetered on just being healthy enough for it to not feel like it was impactful to what I needed to do with my life, moving into my 40s and 50s and whatever, I saw all these people backpacking around Yellowstone that were much older than me and living a fulfilled and healthy lifestyle. And so even if Philly was my last race, what I really want is I want to know that at any moment and any time I can go run 10 miles or 12 miles or hike with my family to the top of whatever. And that's what keeps me moving in a variety. Of ways because it's more the holistic health that I think has been really motivating for me. All the races have been nice cherries on the top and confetti and all that sort of stuff. And I think sometimes that's where honestly I let myself off the hook mentally with a lot of the hard work. It's like I'm healthy, right? Like if I'm running 30, 40, 50 miles a week, I am infinitely more healthy than a lot of folks and I'm setting myself up for a long-term thing. Sometimes I think honestly that cuts into my competitive edge because I know that I've built really good habits. I eat better, I drink less, way less this cycle than ever before. And I live a life where my heart isn't going crazy. James is always commenting on my heart rate on the runs lately. And so I think that sometimes I don't have that same edge because I feel like I'm already so set on what the larger goal is, which is a happy and fulfilling and healthy lifestyle. I mean, what's next? I don't know, James, what should I do next?

Well, I think I'm going to keep it with Chris.

Look, longevity, health, gray goals. Gray goals. Love those goals. But it's also deflection and fear talking, ultimately. I'm pointing to those things. It truly is. Because look, we don't do 22-mile runs for longevity and health. We just don't. We don't run 14-mile medium-long runs for longevity and health. We just don't. We don't do the McClung Special for longevity and health. We just don't. There's different pathways, probably more constructive pathways, for longevity and health than doing those things. So it tells me that there is more to it than just that. It's a great side benefit, certainly. But I just think you're deflecting again away from the things in your head that you're unwilling to say out loud.

Yeah. I mean, man, I didn't come on to this podcast to be... No, I'm kidding.

He wants therapy, not challenge.

Yeah, come on, man. Come on.

I believe your overarching story, the chapter of your life book, we're with you. Beautiful. Now, the chapter within that book of Running, we know you want something there. And what are you trying to write in that chapter?

Yeah, I mean, I don't know. I mean, for me, I do like grabbing the next thing. You know, it was loving something and growing and being challenged, like running a second marathon. I mean, I know most of the work for Houston was done in 2022, but to run a second marathon here has been a tough work. And through the summer, and I think if I did another summer training cycle, I'd feel even better for it. I mean, yeah, Chris, you're right. I mean, I would be lying to you if I didn't say that the fame and fortune of running Boston doesn't seem sexy to me. I mean, I did buy myself a pair of Boston Adidas shorts on clearance the other day with a leftover gift card I had. So, you know, like guilty as charged. I don't know. I mean, I think that just seems really neat. I think continuing to improve on these times, I am hungry, you know? And if you ask the most carnal version of Dan Wiersema, which doesn't come out very often, is that, yeah, like I just have an energy about me and a want. Not necessarily like, I mean, and I would say a very like a competitive side. You know, I joke before I was a goalie, right? You know, like every goalie, if you've ever known, is they're not normal people. I like to pretend that I'm hiding in the back of the goal, but there's something about being the late game hero, right? Or the big save guy when, you know, yeah, goals are great in soccer, but so are saving them. So like, it's not as though, and you know, it took how long on this podcast to get there. But yeah, I mean, there's a lot of things I still want. You know, I think that there's still a lot of things I have to prove. I want to, you know, when I say age gracefully, but I do, you know, like we talked about Brian Ward being our poster boy. I'm not...

All right, we're going to stop you there.

Somewhere in there was a confession.

Yeah, no, for sure.

We finally got the confession, which is that you want something more than just longevity and health, which it's okay to want those things too. So I'm going to stop you there and ask you, specifically related to Boston, again, PSA, you don't have to want Boston. That is okay if you don't. But it's also a worthy goal if you do want it. And it's a powerful experience that many find joy in achieving. So if that's what you want, why? What would that represent to you?

It feels like the runner's race, right? You know, like there's so much made around it. Not that there aren't other beautiful and scenic and challenging marathons out there, but that somehow in my head, in like this, like, that's where runners run, that's, you know, or that's where, and again, not everyone needs to go there, and that doesn't need to be their race, but that just feels like running that makes me feel like the realest runner. I don't know, it just, yeah, I don't know. That just feels like that would be a real stamp on, again, not that I'm not a real runner already, right? And running plenty of other races makes me one, and putting one foot in front of the other makes you a runner, whether you're doing one mile or 50 miles or wherever you're doing it. But that, you know, and maybe that's just like a weird, like chasing the Instagram lifestyle, too.

No, it's not.

It's Dan, it's the guy that felt average at soccer saying, I'm not F'ing average. A quiet whisper to himself that I'm not an average. That's what it is.

Yeah, I mean, and it feels, you know, again, there are other ones that maybe have tighter lotteries or whatever. But yeah, I mean, it would be kind of nice to, again, not that I'm not excelling already.

No, you're doing great, and you need to own that. Certainly, we've already talked about that part. But it's a worthy goal, and it's a goal that I do think for you would represent squelching that narrative, essentially.

Yeah, yeah.

And that's pretty powerful. That's pretty powerful. So I think part of your next steps are owning that goal. Now, I mean, now the world knows it.

So whoops, just told the world.

But owning it and, you know, and look, we got to get through fairly first. I'm not telling you not to focus there and do everything you need to do over the next five weeks to nail that, which I believe you will. But then I would want you to sit down with James and map out the plan to Boston, to Boston qualify, because I think it involves thinking about the evolution of your volume, thinking about the evolution of what race distances you train for. I haven't heard a lot of 5K, 10K training in this conversation so far, which I'm sure James has already told you, and he's spent a little time there, because the faster we get, the more we are limited by our top end speed. And you weren't developing that in a goal necessarily, but it's got to be there from your soccer days, and we've got to now extend that over 5K, 10K, so that we can then eventually extend it over half marathons and marathons. So there's some of that that needs to be worked in. And just being very particular about how you structure your work so that it's all with that end goal in mind.

Yeah, I mean, I got a little taste this spring of a little speed and whatnot, but yeah, I mean, I think there's a lot of different levers that are still available in these bones.

You are so, you're still new in this journey. I mean, you started five years ago. You can develop your aerobic system for 15 to 20 years with consistent work. So there's so much more to go get without really even changing a lot. But obviously we want to make sure we're putting the pieces together in a way that makes sense, because yes, in two and a half years, you're going to be looking at, assuming it doesn't change, a 320 qualifier. And hopefully by then, you're well past it.

Well, cool. I did it, guys.

Therapy session complete?

Now the hard work begins, is actual operationalizing it. And I think the mental side of that is probably the hardest, just getting to that point where you believe.

I would definitely say that's the hardest because you are doing the work. It's almost like there's a little scene in the Pirates, one of the Pirates of the Caribbean, where the antagonist is looking at the damsel in distress and saying, you better start believing in ghost stories because you're in one. And while that's in a negative application, there's a positive here. It's like, you better start believing in it, Dan, because you're in it. Someone who's already chipping away at two marathons, five-minute PR despite conditions, has built a practice of 14-mile medium long runs, a practice of not only running the McClung special in the conditions, but also the thing that you feared the most, and that's having to run alone. And you did that workout in that heat, and you did it alone. You were at your car by yourself, and I was sitting on the rogue deck thinking, where the heck is he? It's like, had I not walked over, I wouldn't even caught you. You got to a spot where you've learned to own the work, the actual physical work, and now let your mind catch up to what your body's been doing and say, yeah, I'm living in it. I'm actually in it.

Yeah, and I mean, when I let myself feel good about those sorts of things, I mean, I talked a lot about loving halves or loving a marathon or loving running or whatever, but I think, I mean, in the end, it's more loving myself and loving who I am in those particular places more than it is the distance. Again, deflection here and there, putting it on the race, whether it be the half, the marathon or Boston or the Turkey Trot or whatever it is. But I think, again, the reality is it's really loving myself in those places and in those races more than anything.

That's true. That's a powerful way to summarize it. And it points to the beauty of the sport, which is that it can be about so much more than just putting one foot in front of the other, which is where you started. We're in a much more evolved place in terms of the impact it's having on your life. But that's so cool, so powerful. And we're happy to be a part of it.

Yeah. I mean, Rogue is, and the community, going back to all that, has just absolutely changed my life. And even when James invited me on, he's like, I want to get deep with you, but you guys cut even deeper than I was ready for. But it was exactly what I needed. And for everybody else who's listening, thanks for putting up with it. But we got there.

We got there. So, well, and thank you for being willing to go there. I appreciate that. So as we wrap, any questions you have for us?

I mean, yeah, no, I mean, you guys, I mean, you unpacked it all, right? So it was, you know, how do we get over the brain? How do we get over the ego? All that sort of stuff. I mean, I dig in on James all the time. But no, I mean, I'm just grateful for you guys and everything that has been built here. I really, like I said, I'm a completely different person than I was five years ago, and that's a better version. And, you know, a lot of that comes from the running. A lot of that comes from whatever we talk about and dig up on these runs. But I don't know. No, I don't have questions. Just gratitude.

Love it. Well, thank you. We have a lot of gratitude for you embracing it and being a part of it. You're a part of the fabric now. All right. We will wrap it there. Thanks to Dan for sharing his story. Thanks to all of you for listening. Thanks to my sponsors, Johnji and BetterHelp, for their support. If you'd like to learn more about us, you can go to roguerunning.com or follow us on Twitter, Instagram, or Facebook at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon. See you soon.