Hey everybody, it is episode 46 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is Chris joining you from Rogue in Austin, Texas. Steve is actually on the line with me today. We're not in the same studio today. Hey Steve.

Hello podcast world.

We are excited to be coming at you today. We've got a couple of things. We've got a smorgasbord of sorts of intro topics that we're gonna cover that I think are interesting, from some articles to some results from this past weekend. And then our main topic today is gonna be race strategy and race planning. We've talked about this a little bit from a marathon perspective, but we haven't talked about it from the perspective of a 5K, 10K, or half marathon. So we're gonna do that, get into that a little bit, kinda tell you how to prepare for perhaps some upcoming fall or winter races of those distances that you might be preparing for. So that'll be our main topic. Before we get there, of course, we'll jump into these kinda current events and some articles we wanted to discuss. One, we had sent to us by a listener, Peter from California, who's gonna be moving to Austin next year, sent us an article from the New York Times, which some of you may have seen, and it basically talked about a study that was recently done in Madrid comparing the impact of a half marathon versus a marathon on the body. So what they did was they took 11 half marathoners and 11 marathoners in a race in Madrid and tried to basically choose runners of similar profiles, and then they did some tests before, some blood tests as well as some vertical leaping tests, and then they did some tests afterwards, checking for dehydration levels and then blood markers that relate to muscle fatigue and muscle inflammation. And so the results were out. It was summarized in the New York Times. Peter wanted our reaction on the article, so we're going to give it to you. And the results aren't that surprising. Basically, the half marathoners had fewer blood markers that would indicate muscle soreness and fatigue, and so the marathoners, although not necessarily dehydrated, had more blood markers that indicated muscle fatigue and muscle wear and tear. And then, of course, their vertical leap test wasn't as good as the marathoners relative to their baseline. So that was the summary conclusion, but the article from the New York Times then jumped from there to saying that it basically meant that running long distances is quote unquote not enough to prepare the legs for the great demands of an endurance event like a marathon. You must add in gym training to prepare your muscles for the stress imposed by these long races. So the conclusion kind of jumped to by one of the researchers at least from the University of Madrid was that strength training is the answer. And that was perhaps the difference between the muscle fatigue you might see in a marathon or not. And so Steve, I'll go to your reactions first. Obviously, we know that strength can be helpful because we just talked about it in our 1% episode. But what are your reactions to this article?

Well, I just want to know why the hell the article was written in the first place. I mean, it's like, I don't know. It almost seems like it was a short, I don't understand really the whole point of it. As I was first reading it, I thought, oh, this could be pretty interesting. I mean, you and I both, though, Chris, as coaches and as athletes, the differences between the half marathon and the marathon are so extreme that it almost defies easy categorization. And so I just look at it and say, I just don't understand what the study's point was, honestly. That's my first point. Number two, why the hell is the New York Times writing about this, when they could write about a whole bunch of other articles that could have been better spent time, my time at least. Thirdly, while I do agree that doing weight training could be one of the most important factors to help athletes be prepared for the late race, we also don't know a lot of other things about what exactly the training was going on. And at one point in time, I think it said that the professor of physiology that was doing the study said that on paper, the marathon racer should have been prepared for the rigors of their distance, or whatever was the distance of it, but no one can prepare for 20. Preparing for 13.1 and 26.2 are just completely different things, as you and I have talked about on many times. There's no way you can prepare appropriately for a marathon. We've talked about that. So my first thought was, okay, interesting, and then later was like, this is terrible. And then the jump that he made straight to weight training without discussing a wide variety of other modalities that might be helpful to preparing for a marathon just made me shake my head. I was like going, I don't understand this at all. And there's a lot of other great articles out there that people could read. And I think their article's title is What Half Marathons Can Teach Us About Running a Marathon. This article could teach us absolutely nothing about running a marathon. That's what I think.

I think you're right. Because there's layers of issues. First of all, the study only had 22 people in it. So that's really, in my mind, not enough of a sample to really draw any meaningful conclusions, especially when you're only looking at two 11-person sample sets. So that's one. The second is any conclusion that you draw from this is, or in terms of application, is overreaching. Because the only thing you can really say is that at least for these 11 people who ran the marathons, they had higher incidence of blood markers indicating muscle fatigue and soreness than the half marathoners. And yeah, well, of course, of course, of course they did. I mean, that's stupid. It's a marathon. You're gonna get beat up by a marathon. And so that's all you can basically say, which we essentially already knew. And any leap to application is silly because as you said, we don't know enough about these people and their training. We don't know enough about how they ran the race, what their splits look like, so there's a wide variety of things I think that could limit or help you manage those elements of fatigue and muscle soreness late in a race. One of those things could be having stronger legs, but others could be having a better race plan, as we're gonna talk about later. It could be perhaps incorporating some pace work into your long runs as we do in our training. There's lots of factors that could affect your late race fatigue. And the fact that none of those were mentioned and they kind of just jumped to one conclusion is sort of silly. So Peter, we're calling bullshit on this one, and we think the New York Times should better spend their time elsewhere.

I don't think burpees are gonna help you that much with the marathon. Because if you go to the final workout, it says look at the nine minute strength workout. Nine minutes of strength workout is not gonna get you ready, and doing burpees with pushups in them, I'm sorry, I'm just calling bullshit all the way. And again, it just doesn't make any sense why this article was written in one of the great newspapers of the world. So shame on the New York Times.

Exactly, and for the listeners, it's like when you see these conclusions drawn in the media from studies like these, you gotta dig deeper and actually figure out what's going on and analyze it yourself without necessarily taking the sound bites that they want you to hear. All right, so that's our intro. Thanks, Peter, for sharing that article. And of course, if anybody has other articles they'd like our reaction to, fire those over to us. My email is chris at roguerunning.com. Second intro topic, Steve, we've gotta talk about the Ironman World Championships that just happened in Kona this past weekend. Obviously, there's swimming and biking involved, but also running. And we had a couple of big races, you could say, because you had Daniel Arif, or Rife, finish a three-peat victory, winning her third straight Kona in a time of eight hours and 50 minutes. She ran a three-hour marathon at the end of her Ironman effort. And then on the men's side, Peter Lang finished in a new Kona record in eight hours and one minute, beating the previous record by two minutes. And his marathon wasn't quite a record this year. He had actually gotten that record last year, running at 239.45. This year, he ran 239.59 to make the pass into first at mile 23 and never look back. And so I want your reactions on this, Steve. There's a couple of questions. First of all, and I'll get to a few other things, but first of all, is this real? Is it possible to run at 239 after 112 miles on the bike and a 2.4 mile swim?

I hope I don't upset all the great triathlon listeners that we have out there. But my guess is that the Ironman race distance is probably the least tested for sport in the world because they have no interest and they have their own governing body and the Ironman is not at the Olympic level. So I don't know if it's possible or not. I'll tell you this, that sport lends itself to doping beyond all sports in my opinion from a training perspective. But I do think it was pretty interesting to consider another idea about this. And maybe you're gonna come up with this later, so if I jump it, just stop me. But I would be interested to see how much faster Lane could run for an open marathon, period. Because that's an interesting-

That was my second question.

Because that is an interesting- What would that translate to you? To me, you would expect it to translate to somewhere in the 220 region, but I would be absolutely shocked. I don't think that he could run 220. Those guys are big boys. They've got huge quads. And I didn't see this race, but I just assumed that he's a big guy, because there's usually big guys coming off. They're strong. And he probably is more like a 230 marathoner who can just run a 240 at the end of an Ironman. And to me, I don't see that as absolutely shocking based on the kind of training they do. But I just say at the first set is that this is probably, because there aren't as many, and triathletes out there, if we're wrong, if I'm wrong, let me know. I have no problem being wrong, but it's not gonna be, these guys, they've got three endurance events, and benefits of performance-enhancing drugs would be immense to these guys from recovery, from the standpoint of being able to get back out on the road and do the work that they need to do. But I do think that one thing that is interesting is to consider that, I would be pretty surprised if Lang is much faster than a 230 marathoner, but he's just really good at coming off the bike and basically suffering. So regardless of whether they are doped or not, it does, as we've talked about this many times, Chris, I don't have a way to say that they are or they aren't, but I can tell you that what he did is pretty fricking amazing. And the kind of training he had to do to prepare to do that is pretty mind boggling. The kind of training that Ironman athletes do, I coach a few Ironman athletes in their run part of their training, and man, they work harder than any other athlete that I have. They do really hard work.

Well, yeah, I mean, I've always, or at least for a long time, I've thought that triathlons is sort of the last bastion of doping that hasn't really been cracked down on because, and I mean, to me, it's like, look no further than the fact that this guy can run a 239 at the end of a 2.4 mile swim, 112 mile bike, in conditions that are extremely difficult. I mean, it's known to get up into the 90s on Kona Island with crazy winds, and you're running through the energy lab and all that, where you've got just the heat just beating off of that lava rock. And so to be able to run a 239 off in those conditions at all is impressive, but much less to do it at the end of an Ironman. And frankly, and then he was like dancing at the end. I mean, he was so excited, which I understand the excitement, but to have that kind of energy at the end, I'm just frankly calling bullshit. I don't believe it. You know, we don't have any definitive proof that these guys are doping, but I'm just not buying it. And as you say, these guys are fairly big guys. I saw Chris McCormick, who was a former Ironman World Champion winner once I'm in person. Dudes like 6'4", you know, quads are bigger than my head, you know, or my waist or something. I mean, they're not tiny Kenyan marathoners. So, I don't know.

The Germans have been dominant for many years, and they're really methodical about the training modalities. And you know, to be a great triathlete, the 60% of a triathlon happens on the bike. And the needs, the energy needs and the physiological needs of a person riding 112 miles on a bike in really windy, hot conditions and somebody running are very, very different. They look different, you know? And if you look at the world's best who are in like the Tour de France, they look a lot more like, you know, Contador looks a little bit like a distance runner, you know? I mean, Lance was pretty big, but most of those cyclists, big quads, but many of them are on the small side. Triathletes are not, they are very big people. Many of times they come from a swim background. So you're seeing very large bodies move at very fast paces in really, really tough conditions. And I'm with you. There's a lot of question marks there, but it still doesn't change that those guys are fucking crazy, man. The triathletes are crazy. They are straight, and to think of a woman winning for the third time in a row and running three hours off that bike in those heat and that conditions, regardless, those are just amazing performances. And you know, you hear this from me, Chris, all the time about on one side, I'm tisking and wondering what's real and what's not real. And on the other side, I still think the body has to do it. They have to actually do the work to be that fast. They have to train that way. And so I still see, you know, I still see beauty and the challenge in it and how tough it is. But you know, it's, I do think it's always been a bit of a crooked sport in my opinion. So anyway.

Yes, still impressive.

Yeah, I'm conflicted.

Still impressive, but yeah, there's some questionable results, I think. But you know, and really that goes all the way back to the days of Mark Allen and Dave Scott.

Those guys were not running that much slower off the bike, Chris.

I know, that's what I mean. They were like 242 or something, and hammering each other. Mark Allen had the previous marathon course record in I think 240 flat or something. So anyway, but that was back in the 80s when they were probably on something besides EPO. So anyway, sorry about that triathletes. I had to shove my skepticism down your throat there, but it is still impressive human results, even if pharmaceutically enhanced. All right, next, another, well, we got to talk about New York Marathon, and we're gonna do a more complete preview with predictions and so forth on our next episode for the New York Marathon. But there's one athlete in particular that I wanted to call your attention to because I saw an article on her this week. Alaphine Tulliamukh is an athlete we've mentioned on this podcast several times. She finished top American at World Cross. She's actually leading the US Road Championship Series for the women. She's... Yeah, I mean, yeah, exactly. She's gonna win. She's gonna win it. She's, you know, competed in the trials, and she's been all over the place, really, was just recently, what, third at the 10-mile championships.

Yeah.

She's gearing up for New York, so she'll be in the field trying to give Shalane Flanagan a run for her money, but as top American. But you know, there was an article on her, and I didn't know a lot about Olafin Tulimuk. I know she's Kenyan-born, now US citizen, but there was an article on ESPNW, and I gotta give a shout out to ESPN for featuring her, because it's not necessarily an athlete they would typically feature. And so it was just interesting to read a couple things, and we'll link these articles in our show notes, but one is that she is the, she's one of 32 siblings. Her father in Kenya had four wives, eight children from each wives, and she was one of 32 kids living on a farm in Kenya, which is crazy. And then secondarily, there was a- Yeah, exactly. Yeah, something going on there. So and then there was another cool story in the article about when she was gearing up for a regional 10, 000 meter championships at the age of 12, Tegla LaRoop, who was one of the original famous Kenyan female marathoners, came to her school to talk and gave her a pair of shoes, which were her first pair of shoes, and she'd been running barefoot all her life. It says she could use it for that race, and that was a seminal moment in her kind of development as a runner, getting that gift from somebody she looked up to in the Kenyan distance running world. So really interesting story about her background, and then talks obviously about her move to the US and her experience here, as well as a now US citizen. But I was just happy to see ESPN actually feature an athlete like that, which you don't typically see.

Yeah, you know, I have a lot more experience with Alfine because when I coached at the University of Texas for the women there, Alfine ran for Iowa State and then she transferred to Wichita State. But the athletes I coached had to race against her, and they always hated racing her because she had basically two modes. Number one was go out fast and push the pace hard and shift gears a lot, which was not typical for what you would see in women's races. A lot of times, there was just one hard push from the front without a lot of gear changing. I remember many athletes that I coached from Mia Bain to Sarah Sutherland and Mario Hall would be very, very frustrated with having to race her because of how tough and unconventional she sort of was. So she's been on my radar for a long time, but what is most intriguing about her to me is just that she's continuing. Number one, it's one of those stories. You know, people have heard me many times argue about the Kenyans becoming American citizens, and she's ripe to become, I think she's soon to be an American citizen. And usually, I'm bitching about that. But without being, you can see someone who has integrated with American society in such a way that it looks more authentic and more real to me and something that I can look at and say, okay, I understand why that would be the case. She's married to an American man who she met in college, and they've been together for a long time. This is the American story of people who moved to our country for reasons of the benefits of what we have to be an American. But the full-on benefits in being an integrated part of our society as opposed to what we're seeing maybe with the groups that are in Colorado Springs right now. But I also love that she's just a fighter, and I'm gonna be cheering for her at New York City. Not that I'm gonna be cheering against Shalane. I'm a big Shalane fan, too. But just happy to see somebody who has stuck with it for many, many years without being in the limelight, getting an opportunity to be, number one, profiled by ESPN Magazine. I'm with you, Chris. I'm just grateful and thankful that our sport gets some interest. And it's great to see that, but it's also great to have an athlete like her who's gonna be in a position to hopefully do well there and have a great race. So again, some really good feel-good stories coming out of our national media right now instead of just the whole, the shit show that we hear frequently about drugs and other things, you know, so.

Yeah, she seems to be one you can root for. So check out that article to get a little bit more context before you see New York. But she's gonna be a part of a really interesting and awesome women's field at New York. You know, in Berlin, it was all about the men's field. But I think in New York, it's all about the women's field because you've got Mary Katany, current women's only world record holder, ran 217 in London. You've got Edna Kipligot, of course, Boston Marathon champion, second in the world championships. Then you've got Shalane, the American, and can she come back from injuries early this year to produce another big marathon result, especially after doing some of the things she did on the track this summer. And then Alfine there as well. So it's gonna be a fascinating race on the women's side, and we will preview that and give you all of our thoughts and predictions on our next episode. We also have to mention with New York that it's gonna be Meb's last hurrah, his final marathon. And he has talked for a while about how he loves the symmetry of this race because he'll be doing his 26th marathon at the age of 42. So kind of matching the miles, 26 miles, and 26 marathons and 42K, 42 years old for Meb. He says he's getting in shape to actually go for it, even if he knows it's gonna be tough at his age. So we've got one last stand for Meb. One question for you, Steve, before we kind of transition into our main topic, at least as it relates to Meb, where does he stand as he wraps up his career in the pantheon of American marathoners? Is he the greatest American male marathoner of all time?

No, I mean, he is among them, but he is not. The greatest American male marathoner of all time, in my view, is a fight between Frank Shorter and Bill Rogers, which we'll be discussing in some future podcasts. But when you win an Olympic gold medal at an Olympic Games, and then you win another Olympic gold medal, even though you come across the finish line second at the next Olympic Games, he should have been a two-time Olympic gold medalist in a marathon. That, I'm sorry, but that just jumps you over. I know that we'll ever see an American that's in a position to do that again. But at a time when marathoning was still an international event, and it was maybe not as many Kenyans in it, but it was still amazing. So I still think Meb is not going to be the greatest. I won't consider him the greatest American marathoner, though I would say that he has one of the top two or three most, if not the most inspiring race ever in his win, which was at the 2014 Boston Marathon when he won. I can't remember the bombing year.

2014.

2014, the year after the bombing, when he snuck away and won the Boston Marathon. That was one of the greatest races I've ever witnessed in my life, and certainly one of the days I was most excited and pumped up about being an American and watching an American marathoner run. But, you know, no, I don't think he's the best American marathoner of all time, but I would say that he's one of the most beloved, and I think that he is singularly and almost exclusively responsible for the uptick in American talent base moving to the marathon sooner and consistently staying at it. I mean, he's been running the marathon for a long, long time, and I think that he has reawakened the marathon as a legitimate sport where we can see more people like Galen and other athletes winning world marathon majors. I don't think that would happen if we didn't have, we wouldn't view it in the same way if we didn't have a marathon leader like Meb was and how amazing he has been to the sport. So, again, I can't call him the greatest of all time, but what I can say is he's done more for the sport since 1990 than any other athlete has done, in my opinion. So it's just really hard to argue against what I would consider a two-time Olympic gold medalist, so.

Well, I would argue that Meb should have at least one Olympic gold from Athens, since I think Baldini was dirty, but I'll have to go back and look at the London Olympics when he finished fourth and see what the podium was there, because he may have been the first clean athlete in that race, too.

But Baldini shouldn't have won that race. Meb should have been third, because the guy from Brazil got tackled.

Yeah, but that's still debatable whether he would have gotten caught by those guys anyway.

That is debatable, but it sure wasn't debatable after that jack wagon came out and tackled his ass.

So we'll have to debate GOAT US Marathoner at some point, because I don't know, I give Meb a little bit more credence than I think you do at this point.

Well, no, I give Meb credence. I would put Meb as probably this third best marathoner of all time, in my opinion. And his medal at the Olympics could put him above Bill Rogers in that category. But Bill Rogers just won the most critical and crucial marathons at the most critical and crucial times. He just never did it at the Olympics. He had some bad, you know, he got 19, he wasn't ready in 72 and 76. He made the team, but he didn't get a chance to run at his best. And to 1980, when he might have been able to make another Olympic team, we didn't go to the Olympics. So, you know, there's arguments there, but there's no doubt that Frank Shorter was clean. There's no doubt that Frank Shorter won the 72 Olympics outright. And he was second at the 76 Olympics, and he was beaten by a guy who is absolutely known drug cheat from the East Germany, who should absolutely be written off the books, and his name should be white clear from all of sport. I have strong feelings about that, but that's why I think that Frank Shorter will be considered the greatest. I think Med is two or three on that list. Still, absolutely great, and certainly in the modern era, at least the era that most of us have been paying attention, the clear favorite, he's way better than Ryan Hall. His performances are better than Ryan Hall's, and he should be beloved more than Ryan Hall, in my opinion. And I don't understand why there's still this cult of love for Ryan Hall. That doesn't make any sense to me. But anyway, we'll leave that alone.

That's a conversation for another day. Either way, Med's resume is impressive. Olympic Civil Medalist, New York winner, Boston winner, and certainly one of the greatest gentlemen in our sport. For sure, it will be sad to see him go, but awesome to watch him in his last race in New York. So stay tuned for a full preview on both the women's and the men's side as we will do that next episode. All right, so now let's jump into our main topic. We're gonna be talking about, as I said at the top, we're gonna be talking about race strategy and race planning and how you can prepare for all distances, 5K, 10K, half marathon, and marathon sort of being our featured road distances. And then at the end of this discussion, kind of generic discussion, we're gonna talk about my 10-mile race coming up, and Steve's gonna kind of talk me through a plan on that so you can see how this might work in a actual athlete coach discussion. So first of all, Steve, I wanted to set some ground rules. We'll kind of assume that the race strategies we're gonna be using here are fairly generic and that the courses are gonna be relatively flat, so there won't necessarily be any kind of terrain to think about, although it'll be important to note that that obviously would impact a race strategy and a race plan, but we're gonna kind of apply this discussion in a way that you can sort of say, look, for any kind of flat or flat-ish race, these are the strategies we would use because there's obviously an infinite number of terrain options out there, and you can't account for those in one kind of simple generic discussion like this. So we'll start with the 5K, Steve. And I'm talking 5K road race here. What would be your strategy for somebody who's trying to run their fastest 5K?

With all the caveats that you just stated, Chris, it's really important to be sure that we state that. It's kind of like when you before you tell somebody to embark on any serious physical activity, they need to go see their doctor, right? But it really is important to realize that there will be different scenarios for different people given certain circumstances. But generally, these are our recommendations, right? Are we clear on, we're both in agreement on that?

Exactly.

So first of all, people have heard me say this a couple of times on this podcast, and I really truly believe it. I think that the 5, 000 meters well run is perhaps, a well run 5, 000 meters is perhaps the hardest race to do, because it hurts so bad. It's very similar to the marathon in the sense that the way that it plays out over a much shorter time frame, you have to get out fast enough to be in a good position, you have to be willing to suffer through lots of ups and downs, and you have to close it out at the finish. So basically, the best thing I would say for a 5K is, know what you want to run for the cumulative 5K distance that you need to run. And then divide that in, know what your pace per mile needs to be. So once you've got that down, my usual suggestion is, if you're in a race that's got a good number of people in it, or if you're a woman who has a lot of men who will be running around you, because they usually do get more bodies to run with comparatively, get out at least as fast as what you want to average for your pace per mile in the 5K. So let's say that somebody wants to run six minute per mile pace for their 5K, my suggestion would be to get out at 550, 555, or six minute pace for that first mile. And a lot of folks will say, wow, I thought everything's about negative splitting. Well, not really, not in this race. In a 5K, it's about running as close to what you're physically capable as possible. The biggest mistake somebody can make, Chris, in a 5K is to go out too fast. So you absolutely need to go out close to what you think you're going to be able to average per pace per mile, but not too much faster. And the degree to which too much is, right, is a real judgment call. And it's a really tough thing, and that's why I think this race is so hard. Because let's say an athlete who wanted to run 6-minute pace could handle maybe 653 or 655 for the first mile. I mean, 553 or 555 for the first mile, they could not handle 545. Only 8 seconds faster could put the nail in the coffin for them. So my first point is get out as close to your even split as possible, but realize it's going to hurt really, really bad. And 5Ks hurt really bad, Chris. You know this. You've experienced a number of them. And then the second mile is basically look around you and hang on. So either do the famous Chris thing, start fishing, go fishing and start to catch people, keep looking up ahead of you, or really work, really focus on your watch if you're able to utilize that feature to keep yourself on pace and do not let yourself fade. Because in that second mile, all the demons, all the devils, all the negativity that could possibly occur will be coming on to you. You'll say to yourself, I can't hold this pace, I can't manage this effort, but you can if you'll just stick with it. And so either using other bodies or using your watch to help keep you on pace, you want to run, you'll probably run a little slower that mile. Again, in our six-minute mile runner, who's trying to run a six-minute per mile for that 5K, they may end up at six minutes or 6.03 or 6.05, but they're trying to run as close to that six minutes as possible. And then in the final mile, it's gut it out and hold on. And this is the part that really makes the 5K so difficult for so many people, is they're not really willing to get into that pain cave or they're not able to negotiate or manage their way through it. And so it becomes really, really difficult. A much kinder and gentler approach would be to do, and if I had an inexperienced 5K runner, what I would tell them to do is to maybe go out in our 6-minute mile per mile goal time scenario. I might ask somebody to go out at 6.10 and then run 6.05 and then see if they can kick it into 5.55 at the end. Now, that's a much safer approach and it's easy to do, but you're going to probably end up 20 to 30 seconds slower than you want to be. What do you think, Chris?

Well, yeah, I agree with that last point, which is that some of it depends on how much you're trying to wring out of it. You know, if you know you have some... Say you're trying to PR, but you know that your fitness is well beyond your current PR, you might decide to have a more conservative start and leave a little bit on the table as you can run a negative split throughout. But if you're trying to get every second out of this race and kind of optimize your race, given your current fitness, my general advice is to get out, as you said, a little bit faster than your target pace, five to ten seconds. There's actually science, and I can share this article on as well in the show notes. There's science that says that you kind of have some free time in that initial period because you've got adrenaline pumping. You know, as you get off the starting line, you've got some kind of free energy there. So if you get out a little bit quick, that's okay. Not too quick, but a little bit quick. So I like to tell people five to ten seconds fast on the first mile and then try to run your average pace, your target average on the second mile, and then close it out with whatever you have left at the end. It's really important, I think, late in a 5K to find a way to race, you know, find bodies to go chase. As you said, you're going to have people around you. I like to say go fishing, but look ahead of you. Find someone ahead of you who you can go get. Pick a shirt color that looks bright and interesting, that's easy to focus on, and then go chase somebody down. Because if you're not chasing anybody down, you're probably slowing down. But that kind of energy of somebody else pulling you along will help you get the most out of yourself versus you just trying. If you were running a time trial, for example, it would be much more difficult, perhaps, to get every second out of the race. So a little bit fast first mile, hold second mile, and then go fishing and close hard in the third mile. That's my general advice. You know, the other thing is, Steve, and we talked about this a little bit in one of our episodes, is you've got to be prepared. I always tell my athletes before a 5K is, don't neglect your mental preparation. Because as you said, this is as hard in a lot of ways as a marathon, just a different kind of pain. So don't neglect your mental preparation for a 5K. It's going to be over much more quickly. But to have some sort of mantra in your head, especially to stay focused in that second mile, is going to be really important.

Yep, I agree. You nailed it.

So the other thing I will say that you might find happens, and we've talked about this before, I know, coach athlete Steve, is that with the 5K and then especially with the 10K, if you happen to get in over your head in a 5K or 10K, because it is shorter and because it's not like you're bearing yourself at the end of a marathon, you can, even if you go out too fast and get in over your head, you can recover from that. If you sort of back, if you recognize it, back off for a little bit, regain your composure, and then dive back into the paces, that can work in a 5K or 10K if you get over your head. So don't neglect that kind of concept. If you happen to get out to a point where you're struggling, it's okay to back off a little bit and then reconnect with the pace as you're able to get your breathing and heart rate under control.

Well, I agree with you 100% on that from a 10K perspective. In fact, my race plans for the 10K are almost always include going right to the edge and then backing off and going right to the edge and backing off. But I would caution any, you know, what I would call beginner to intermediate level runner to take that approach with a 5K because it can burn you so badly. But that doesn't mean it's not a worthwhile activity. It just means that I would call it advanced studies in 5K is pushing over that edge early on, whereas I would consider for the 10K, it's kind of par for the course. It's what needs to be done in a 10K. Because even though they're physiologically not that far off from each other, the 10K is just a kinder, gentler race, Chris. It's just an easier race to run, and it sort of falls much more in that more endurance side than the 5K does. So, of course, most of our listeners are probably scared shitless of a 5K. So I probably don't need to offer too many more being conservative appellates to that, because they're probably already too conservative. So maybe I should have just left that little segue alone.

Right. So one thing while we're on 5K is before we jump to the 10. One question I get often, and this kind of spans distances, but a lot of people ask me, how do you warm up for a race that's so short? You know, it's like, do you do a lot of, you know, do you do three mile warm up? Do you do, you know, strides? What do you do? What do you recommend for a 5K warm up to make sure that when they get out, they get out in the right pace?

Well, I guess some of this means that people would need to be practicing some of these things before they did it, with that said. But I think that one of the things I've used, well, first of all, the most important thing is making sure that you turn all the lights on. We've used that term before. I've used that term before, Chris, but it means making sure you do some drills and some leg opening exercises and some, you know, getting your arms opened up, your chest opened up, your breathing opened up. It's just basically doing some simple, basic running-based drills that you can find nearly anywhere online to sort of get yourself, to turn the lights on with your body. Another thing that I think is really important to do is to do some strides, and those are like, you know, five, five to seven to even ten second gradual buildups that you go faster than the race pace you're going to try to be running for that first mile. That's another recommendation. Those are pretty standard things that people recommend. I'm going to give our listeners a secret, right? So I don't use this one. I don't give this one to too many people very often, but I use it sparingly with certain athletes, and for many people who are marathoners, it works really well. Consider doing about a five to ten minute normal warm up, just easy run that you would do. Let's say that somebody wants to run a two to three mile warm up before their 5K. One of the things I'll suggest is in the first mile, run super easy. In the second mile, if you go one, let's say two or three miles, in the second or third mile, do some tempo running, five to seven minutes, at what your half marathon goal pace is. There's something weird that happens, and I don't have any scientific proof for this, Chris. I just know in my own experience, it worked, and for many athletes that I've given this little tidbit of information to, it's helped them a lot. I don't know, there's something weird. It doesn't hurt too bad, it doesn't feel too tough, but if you do a little bit of half marathon goal pace work for about five to seven minutes, in the context of your warm up, it seems to really prep people for that, for whatever little lactate dump that might happen in that initial mile, that initial first mile. Athletes seem to be able to handle that a little bit more, and not as weirded out by that feeling, and they might be better able to push through that sort of scary moment where it feels like you're going too fast. So that's a little secret that I would... I use that for the half marathon. I've used it for my milers many times. I used it in cross-country. When I coached cross-country, I had coached girls who ran 5K cross-country, and guys who ran 10K cross-country. I would do that all the time, where I would ask them to do about 10 minutes of tempo-based running to get the lights turned on and to be prepared for that first initial shock. And it's weird because the athletes sort of look at it like, oh, I have a workout before my race. I had to really work hard to make sure people understood that it wasn't detrimental to their performance, but it was just basically another aid in sort of turning those lights on and getting that body primed and ready to go. So there's a little pro tip for folks.

And that's something I've definitely used. My typical routine for anything up to 10K certainly, half marathon, it kind of depends on the weather. Because weather, to me, is a factor on warm up. If it's cold, I want to do a little bit more warming up than if it's hot, because if it's too hot or humid, then I like to keep my warm up as short and easy as possible to try to keep the body temperature down. But assuming the weather is good and the temperatures are good, I'll usually do two or three miles of warm up with two or three three-minute segments about tempo effort and then drills and some strides to kind of wrap things up and get to the starting line. So that's my typical routine, but I think warm up is something you kind of have to play with. And as you're doing races, experiment with different things, different elements. Like we've just talked about strides, drills, some tempo work, distance, and then find what works to you because that works for you. Warm up is a very personal kind of thing. It's what you need to do to get your body amped up and ready.

Hey Chris, before we move on, I want to say one other thing. I want to ask our listeners, don't be afraid of racing. When you're not in your marathon-prepped part of your cycle, you should get out and run a lot of different race distances. The 5K is probably the most valuable race distance, and it's something you could do week in, week out if you wanted to. So never be afraid of throwing a 5K race in, in your cycle. The best 5K workout you can possibly do is a 5K race. So that to our listeners is, it is a race distance that really takes a lot of practice. And so many, at least in our part of the country, Chris, at least in Austin where we live, so few people get out and race them, enough in my opinion. And I think anybody trying to run a great marathon to a great half marathon should also be in the context of keeping these 5K and 10K races in their plans and trying to execute great race plans for those race distances at every juncture, at any juncture, and not be afraid of racing. I'm pretty sure you would agree with me on that.

Absolutely. Okay, so let's talk 10K. For me, 5K is hard, but for me, at least in my experience, it took me a while to figure out the 10K. The hardest part for me with the 10K, at least early in my running career, was staying focused in the middle, miles 3 and 4, because it was kind of easy to get out at a decent pace for the first couple of miles. Once you hit that fifth or sixth mile, it's easy to close, because you know you're kind of getting close to the end. But that middle section, I would often lose focus, lose valuable time, and then fade a little bit, and then get back on it at the end. There was a long time early in my running career where I was trying to break 38 minutes for the 10K. I think I attempted it four or five times and missed each time before I finally got it done, because I would lose focus in the middle, and those middle miles would be too slow. So what are your recommendations for a 10K race plan?

Get out. Right off the bat, it's to get out faster than what would be your per-mile split. Unless there's a hill. There's a caveat there, because we have the CAP 10K that many of our athletes run, and the first mile is a long, gradual uphill. So it's very dangerous to get out fast on that course. But for most races, what I'll tell people with the 10K is not be afraid to get out. And my basic marathon, my basic 10K race plan is get out and keep chasing and keep pressing. Press and then take your foot off the gas pedal. And then press again and take your foot off the gas pedal. I like to talk about the 10K as a game. It's like executing the perfect fun race plan. It's not so painful, usually, through most of it. And you can actually use each mile as an opportunity to check in with yourself and see are you pressing and pushing appropriately for what your goal time is. And my guess, Chris, was you talk about being at the mile four to five mile marker where you start to lose focus and you're not really staying on it. That's a factor of many people being in a position of thinking about the 10K as an even split run race. And I don't ever think that the 10K should be run that way. I think it should be more of a surge affair where you're constantly shifting gears, you're constantly trying to stay on the edge, and then when you get over the edge a little bit, back, back off. Because the race distance is, as long as you're not way too fast, as long as you're not 30 seconds per mile too fast, your body will recuperate and recover pretty quickly if you're at your 10K paces, especially if you've done 5K and 10K pace training work. And that's another part. We're talking race strategy, but we're also assuming that there's some facility and some work that's been done at each one of these individual paces. We do that in our program, Chris, and you do it with your athletes, where you're constantly fluctuating between 5K, 10K, half marathon and marathon paces. But if you've done your work at 5K and 10K training paces, you should be okay pressing the edge there and then backing off. Now, what's normal for most people is when the back off happens, they back off for longer than they should. And my suggestion for most people there is check yourself after a minute. 60 seconds is plenty enough time to get recovered if you're only about, you know, if you're in that 5 to 10 second per mile window of where you need to be. I don't know if you've experienced this, Chris, but in many people when I've talked to them and in my own experience as a racer in the 10K, like I could run, you know, let's just say that I was trying to run 5 minute per mile pace. 455 would feel way too fast, but 5 minutes would feel great. It's like a weird, the 10K is that weird thing where just that 5 seconds is the difference. And if you're running that 455 pace, let's say for a little while, and then you back back off to 5 minute pace or 505, if you just spend just a minute getting yourself and then pushing again, I think you'll overcome that sort of fourth and fifth mile malaise that kind of takes over for the runner. So that's usually what my suggestion is. We don't get a lot of opportunities to run the 10K in Austin. There's not very many races. And the race that we do have, the most famous one is the Cap 10K. And I don't even really consider the Cap 10K a 10K because even though it's that race distance, it's so unusual with the course's hilliness and the terrain and the way that that race plays out. You have to run a particular strategic plan that sort of puts it in a weird way. Most of my 10K suggestions are coming from the track or my own experiences running a 10K on the road. But if you're in an area where you've got flat road 10Ks, this pushing, going to the edge and then backing off for a minute and then going to the edge again and backing off for a minute is a really helpful and good way to do it. But it requires a lot of courage. You know, Chris takes a lot of guts to do it that way.

So if you do it that way, though, you know, the Garmin is going to tell you something at the end that says, hey, you know, this is what you ran for each mile. What would you expect to see the output to look like?

It would be in that 5 to 10... It would probably be... You would go out... Similar like the 5K, you would go out with your even split plan, but with an idea of an even split, what that even split per mile would be, right, for that 10K distance. But you don't want to settle there. And I guess that's my main point, is that if you said, okay, six minute per mile pace is my 10K pace, I want to run for this race, locking into the six minute per mile pace will make you really mentally tired at three and a half to four to five. Guaranteed. It's too long for the mind to stay focused on one activity at near max level. That's my point. And so by continuously going to 555 or 550, and then being like, oh shit, that was a little too hard, I shouldn't have gone quite so fast, now I have to throw off to 605 or 610, as long as you don't get mentally in a place where you get worried or scared about that and you're willing to come back at it and you're willing to be courageous, you'll steal from a 10K way more. You'll run 10, 15, 30 seconds faster for a 10K than you would have normally with a consistent per mile, you know, six minute per mile pace goal. And I know that to be true because I've done it many times myself, and I've had athletes who have done it that way have had great levels of success doing it that way. But it probably would need to be prefaced with one or two 10Ks where you ran an even split race plan, you know?

So it looks like even splits, but it's not that in practice. As I think about my 10K PR, which came a few years ago, I remember my mantra for that one was every second counts. So every time I felt like I was backing off or kind of slipping the pace a little bit, I would always kind of remind myself every second counts and impress for as long as I could to try to stay on it. And so kind of de facto, I think I was doing what you're talking about.

I had an athlete in a cross-country race. You got to do that great 10K cross-country race up in Lehigh. Remember, Chris, when you got a team up there to run cross-country? And cross-country is such a beautiful event, and it is the quintessential 10K race, too, in my opinion. But I had an athlete there who was running at the, you know, post-collegiate athlete that was running there, and he was more of a 5K 1500-meter runner, and he was just so scared about my race plan of pushing to the edge, and I made him... He had a little, you know, an Ironman, Timex Ironman watch, and I had him have a one-minute timer. All he could do was put on a one-minute timer on it. At the start of the race, he had to hit that watch for one minute, and each minute, for the first five minutes, he didn't listen to his watch. He didn't even know what was going on. But for the next 25 minutes, I think he ran 30 to 31 minutes for his 10K in that race, he had to get shocked by his watch every minute. And at the end of the race, he said, in the first 10 to 15 minutes, I hated you. I never wanted to hear another beep. He said, but by the end of the race, I realized that I was backing off more than I needed to. And when I heard that alarm, I heard your voice say, you can go again, try again. And he said, so for the last 15 minutes, 15 times, I asked myself, can I go one more time? And I found in that, you know, from 15 to 20 minutes, the answer was hell no. But from 20 minutes to 30 minutes, it was, oh, yes. And then he caught, he said he caught somewhere near 30 people over that last bit because he hadn't settled in to that mid-race malaise and that sort of feeling bad or feeling sorry for himself or feeling in pain, he was able to adjust. And I was like, you know, it was just a simple little tool to utilize to try to get him to think about it. And, you know, I knew it was a double-edged sword. I thought that could come back and cut both of us, but it worked that day, you know? But that illustrates the point I was trying to make.

Well, it's interesting. It also kind of goes back to the tactic I've referenced before, which is the counting that sometimes I'll do when I start to get into a funk, and I'll count to 30 and push for 30 seconds. And knowing you can do anything for 30 seconds, and then sometimes you find a new gear or you restart and you try again. So it's kind of the same concept, but interesting to think about using a watch to perhaps reinforce that as well.

Yeah, I think it works really well in that case. And the two races we're going to be talking about now, the 10K and the half marathon, are the most forgiving races in track and field because there's enough time to fix anything. And I guess the point I would like to make with people running, most people know that with the half. I think most people's experiences of the half marathon is that it's a pretty easy race if you've done your volume. But people don't feel that way about the 10K, and I would argue, I would vehemently argue that it's more of a mental approach to being on top of it and being courageous and taking risks. And they'll pay off in both the 10K and the half marathon greatly. But because the 10K is exponentially shorter, those risks will pay off much greater if you're willing to be courageous and take the chances.

Interesting. But yes, it might look like an even split race, but it shouldn't be, as you kind of press and then back off, pressing you back off. So that's the 10K. Let's go to the half, which you said is easier. I don't know that listeners would necessarily agree. I think if you're running a fast half, I don't know how forgiving that is, in my experience. But let's talk about it. How would you approach a half marathon?

I almost always use a negative split plan for the half marathon, because the race is just... It gives you so many gifts, Chris. If you're prepared for one, and the weather is just even halfway decent... I have two athletes, two fast athletes this weekend, who are gonna be up in Toronto running a half marathon. And my race plan for them is the one I'm gonna give you, which is negative split. Get out exactly about five seconds to ten seconds slower than what you want to run for the first two to three miles so you can settle in and make sure the lights have turned on, that you're woken up. What's your warm up for a half marathon? That's always an interesting question, because for marathoners, I don't ask them to warm up very much. In fact, I don't want them to warm up nearly at all, other than what they just need to do, just because I think that the first three miles should be spent warming up. But in a half marathon, I think people will do some warm ups. But ultimately, it doesn't really matter, because I would suggest five seconds to ten seconds per mile slower, which would put somebody at two to three miles, 20 to 30 seconds behind what they want to run. But if then they get on even splits, depending on their race course and what the hills are and where they're positioned and what kind of difficulty is in the terrain of the race that they're running, that from mile two to three to mile six or seven, the 10K point and just beyond that, my suggestion is even splits from there. And then what I've found is many marathoners that are preparing for a half marathon, if they've done, my athletes have done 5K pace work and 10K pace work and half marathon work, they're really surprised at seven or eight miles how good they feel. And you know, an athlete who feels mentally positive, three quarters of the way through the race, two thirds of the way to three quarters of the way through the race, you know this Chris, like monsters are made, you know? People get aggressive and they run amazingly, they run in a really aggressive, positive way if you let them run in a sort of negative split plan. And the race distance is not enough, like the marathon, where the monkey's gonna jump on their back no matter what. There's no, it's not really a no matter what question with the half marathon, you know? So that's my suggestion. It's like go out a little bit slower, get on your even split plan, and it's eight miles, seven or eight miles, know where you wanna go, and start dropping five to ten seconds per mile if you can, and then see if you can't rock that last 5K and do the best you can. That's my normal suggestion for a half marathon.

I generally agree. Usually I break it into three chunks, just like you've described. I sort of say, okay, first two to three miles, start anywhere from ten to twenty seconds per mile slower than your target. Work down to your target pace over that first couple of miles or three miles. Then hold, I usually tell people to hold until mile nine or ten. Try to be as consistent as possible through that middle section, and then close the last 5K or the last four miles, depending on how they're feeling. That tends to be kind of what works well. I think for an athlete that's a little bit more experienced in the half, they can maybe go a little bit sooner, because they might have a better sense for where they are and how much they have left. But just like with the marathon, as we've talked about, it's like you don't want to go too soon for fear of kind of crapping out at the end. So I'm always a little bit hesitant that that will happen. So I usually say, all right, get to 9 or 10, reassess, and then from there, pick it up based on how you feel trying to really crush it over that last 5K especially.

Don't you think, though, Chris, that that experience of so many races, we just talked about the 5K, the 10K, and we know about the marathon, they're goat ropes. I mean, people get their butts kicked. They get their asses kicked in those three races. And the half marathon is the one place where an athlete can actually feel like they can get on top of it. You know, and I think some of this might be balanced from the fact that I had, you know, my personal experience is I got to run in the inaugural, the very first World Half Marathon Championships in Brussels, Belgium, many years ago. And I had this experience. I had no idea what I was doing, Chris, no idea. I mean, I had run, I was a 5K, 10K runner. I was a good cross-country runner. I had never planned on running a half marathon or a marathon at any point. I was of the opinion that the shorter distances were the coolest and that marathoning was overrated. I went through the first 10K at my PR, okay? I PR'd at 10K. And I looked over, and there was a guy who I swear to God was a 50-year-old Russian guy. I swear he was 50 years old. And he was going, like breathing heavy. And I'm like, I just PR'd for 10K, and I've got a master's 50-year-old Russian who's about to whip my butt. And I accelerated out of shame and out of the feelings of there's no possible way that this old man can beat me. And it sort of wogged me out to the... And I ended up running... I didn't run a negative split in that race because I'd already PR'd, but I ran really fast and way faster than I would have ever expected to. Shame was important to it. But I also think that part of it is, that's maybe my view about the Half Marathon, is that I was so... When I got to 10K at a PR, I thought, there's no way I could possibly finish this thing. And I did, and I did in a way that I was really proud of, and I think that the Half Marathon gives the greatest gifts because it doesn't ask... Physiologically, it doesn't ask of us anything that we're not capable of, unless you just go out really, really, really way too fast. I was aided by a master, a 50-year-old Russian guy, but everybody has different ways to get motivated.

Yeah, so well, I think... I mean, the point there to me is that it can be forgiving. And I like the half as a race where, especially if I'm trying to get someone to practice suffering and learning perhaps their limits or testing their limits, occasionally I'll give someone a plan or at least we'll discuss a plan that's sort of like, hey, we're going to go out intentionally faster than we think you're ready for. So that you have to get into that kind of cave and pain cave and then figure it out and see what happens because sometimes you surprise yourself. And I think this distance is one where you can sometimes surprise yourself if you just go out a little bit more aggressively than you think you're capable of. And it's not, as you said, you're not running past that aerobic or anaerobic threshold into a place where your stomach is flipping and you're breathing and heart rate are completely out of control because it's more mellow paces, at least I use mellow in quotes there. And so people can dig out of that hole and kind of figure out what their limits are and then come back and still have a really strong race even if they've gone a little bit too aggressively early. But that being said, I still like overall, if you're trying to optimize for the half, having that plan of kind of negative splitting in those three chunks. This does remind me of one of my, I guess my second fastest half marathon, and this would be a non-3M, for those in Austin, 3M is a downhill half, so it kind of gets an asterisk on it, but this was a flat racing Columbus I did. And I remember showing up at the starting line, not really knowing kind of who would be there. You know, it's like I think I'd looked at the previous year's results and thought, you know, I could be in the mix to win this if the right cards play out and if the right people show up. And so I get to the starting line, I'm looking around and there's like five guys from some college cross-country team that were there. And I saw them, I'm like, surely they're gonna kick my ass. And so I, in my head, made a mental note, and we actually started on a track, the first three quarters of a lap were on the track before you went off onto the roads. And so I made a mental note, you know, stay away from those guys, at least give them a little cushion because they're gonna go out faster than you're capable of. And so I did that, gave them a little leash and said, okay, I'm gonna kind of settle in. And I was the sixth person in that race around the track, probably settled in like 20, 30 meters behind them, come through mile one, feeling relatively good. But I looked at my watch and it said something like 525, which, you know, as you know, Steve, is in over my head for a half marathon.

That's what I say, lactate dump.

So I remember looking at my watch and that, I'm like, oh, man, I just screwed myself. And so I spent the rest of that race, you know, trying to stay, you know, composed and stay on it, which I did fairly well. I think I finished in 117, which is right about 550 overall average pace. And so I held it together pretty well after going in, and I ended up catching one of the five college kids who came back to me at the end. But, you know, I was able to kind of work it out. You know, it's like I had to back off in that second mile, but I kind of stayed on it, and I wasn't so in over my head that I couldn't figure it out. So I kind of worked it out, and ended up having a decent result, even though I got in over my head early. So that's my half marathon anecdote. All right, so let's talk marathon. Obviously, we've talked about the marathon before, in episode five, in fact. We did a whole episode on marathon race planning. So I think everybody knows that we talk about the marathon in the context of a negative split or perhaps an even split for the right athlete. Just as by way of summary, Steve, give the folks who might be newer listeners a recap on what we recommend for marathon pacing.

The marathon always wins. So you're going to suffer anywhere from hopefully 16 to 18 to the finish line. And so knowing that that's going to be the eventuality, regardless of the training you've done, regardless of the pacing that you decide to integrate for your race, you're going to suffer. I've had recently a couple of my athletes that have run early this season. I've got the majority of them running California International in a couple of weeks. But I've had a few athletes run recently, and I think that to a person, my suggestion to them after their race was, we need to be better prepared for the suffering that happens late in races. I used to say we need to be prepared to accelerate at the end of races. But I actually don't think that it's a physiological problem as much as I think it is a psychological one. And that is just to be willing and accept the fact that you're going to hurt. I recited that Jordan Hussay quote that she did in the last week, Chris, after Chicago, where she said basically, to paraphrase, that her job is to suffer. She expects to suffer. She takes pleasure in the fact that her job requires her to suffer, and so she suffers. But she never freaks out. She stays balanced. And so if you know that you're going to have problems later on in the race, and you know the race is going to create these really negative physiological feelings, you need to do something psychologically to prepare yourself for it. And so, yeah, my race plan is based on a psychological model of preparing yourself to suffer. Now, that doesn't mean that you go out in the first 10 miles too fast. Well, that's just pouring alcohol. It's like pouring jet fuel on a fire. It doesn't make any sense. So what you want to do is say, if it's going to hurt later, how do I optimize my chances to feel good later on in the race? And that's to go out as slow as you possibly can to still achieve a time goal that you might have. So if you have no time goal, then go out really easy. Wave at the crowds. Kiss babies. Listen to a podcast. Do something else. Literally chill out and relax if you don't have a time goal. And the race is going to create the difficulty necessary later on because of fuel consumption, because of the race distance, because of the pounding, because of the heat, because of all the other things that happen in a marathon. So my suggestion is to go out slower and close out the race, and maybe you can accelerate, maybe if you've done enough 22 to 24 mile runs, maybe if you've planned your training just right, or maybe if you just catch that amazingly beautiful day that happens occasionally for marathoners, you'll have a less than terrible experience of the last five to six miles. But Chris, how many marathons have you run where the last five miles were pleasurable?

It's always going to hurt, even if you're finishing strongly and picking it up at the ends. I've run a lot of really good, smart marathons, negative split style, but it hurts every time. So, you're right. That's the general blueprint. And I think more experienced athletes can perhaps start a little bit faster and run a more even split race, or some of it can be maybe the nature of an athlete's strengths. You know, I just had an athlete run Chicago, and she, as I mentioned on this show, Chris McCloud, I congratulated her. She and I came to agreement on a more even split race than I normally give because she is such a consistent metronomic pacer, knowing that she wouldn't start too fast, she would get down to her pace, but not below, and she would be able to hold it consistently, which she was able to do. So in that case, I kind of allowed for a more even split approach. But most of the time, you want to start slow. I'll recommend sometimes even a minute per mile slower than the first mile than your target, working down at the first three to five miles to your target pace, holding that through to 21, 22, as consistently as you can, and then close it out with what you have at the end. That's the general blueprint. Now, some people wonder, you know, shouldn't I be banking time? I mean, we hear that all the time. Shouldn't I be banking time early because it's easier early so that I don't lose as much at the end? And I always laugh at that because I'm like, that's the silliest approach ever. Why would you set yourself up to kind of waste energy early when you're going to need the energy at the end? So I talk about banking energy. So be conservative, as Steve said. Start slow. Bank energy so that you have something left at the end to finish out strongly.

So, Chris, I'm going to break in here for just a second because I think that one of the things, you know, you and I have a tendency, because we've been doing this for a long time, to not think the way that some of our listeners might think. And that's, you know, I understand, it took me a number of years over the last four to five years to understand why people would even conceive of a banking time concept to make any sense, right? But I've done my homework to put myself in the position of my athletes or of other athletes, and I've said, why is this in a compelling storyline? Why in the world would someone think this works? And I understand, because it's so easy, right? I mean, the first 10 miles are so easy. We've done hard runs. Many of our listeners have done 20-mile and 22-mile runs and 10 miles at their MGP, even though it's hard to do in workouts for some reason on race day, it's really easy. And I think that the problem is, is that we just want to tell, we're just gonna, people want to be in the moment. And if you're choosing to just be in the moment from a marathon perspective, you're going to get goat roped. You're going to get your face pushed into the dirt. You're going to be crushed. So I understand why their idea, why we see so many athletes, Chris, there's so many athletes that we coach consistently make this mistake over and over again. And so I'm giving people permission to think the way they think, right? But I'm gonna ask them all to be more intelligent. If they've taken this time to get an hour and 15 minutes into a strategy podcast about running, they're pretty smart people. And so don't make that mistake. Realize it's going to win. And just remember the mantra that I say, which is the marathon always wins. And be more conservative in your approach. Chris, I have favored over the last three to five years a much more even split plan, especially with the races that my athletes run, which have been sort of downhill-ish courses recently with Boston and we're doing San Yen. And so we'll do a real even split plan, but I call that a effort negative split, which is that the time is even, but because the early on in the race, it gives you some time because of the downhills that you can adjust that way. But anyway, I just wanted to give a little, I wanted to bump in there just to give a little credence to understanding why people know that. You know, you and I, we've been down this road for so long, we kind of forget that, but I get it. I understand why people say I should bank time, but I usually want people to bank time once or twice, they never do it again. Or they never come back to the marathon, or they never come back.

It's so miserable at the end.

It's so miserable.

It's a death knell sort of strategy. And as you say many times, there's sort of the rule of threes. For every minute you go too fast early on, you lose three minutes or more at the end, and that's the result if you're trying to bank time. You're going to slow down, you're going to slow down more than you would otherwise, and you will not be getting your best race on that day. You got to trust us on this one, folks, even though logic might tell you otherwise, or at least false logic might tell you otherwise. Okay, Steve, so it's time to coach me up. We're going to talk about a 10-mile race, so it's not really sitting in any of these buckets, but I think it will be interesting because it will also allow us to bring in some nuances of terrain to this discussion. As everybody knows, I've got this big breaking 60, breaking one-hour goal coming up in a couple weeks for a run for the water, a 10-mile race here in Austin, Texas. It's a really challenging hilly course. You sort of have... Mile one is sort of flat, and then you've got two to six and a half or so of rolling pretty challenging hills, and then about six and a half to the finish is mostly flat with a few ups and downs, you know, more gradually here and there. This will be my seventh time racing this race and run one variation or another, so I'm very familiar with the course. Steve is very familiar with coaching it because he's had a lot of athletes run it over the years. I must say, Steve, as I think about this one, I am questioning, you know, strategy a little bit. I'm trying to think, you know, is there a different way that maybe I've approached this race in the past? So I'd love to get your thoughts on how I should tackle this race coming up here in a few weeks.

Well, Chris, you know, we are the athletes that I coach in Team Rogue. I made everybody do this two weeks ago. We did a sort of a run-for-the-water simulation, and we ran on the course. We didn't all hit the exact race course because it was, you know, 5.30 in the morning, and it was dark, and there are some changes to the course that has some winding in the sort of important, you know, first third of the race. But as you said, Chris, I've coached this race now for nearly 10 years. I mean, it's been happening for nearly 10 years, if it's not on its 10th year. You know, it's a 10-mile race that I would consider one minute slower, at least one minute slower, for the very fit, very focused, with a good race plan runner. Wouldn't you say that's true? It's about a minute slower per mile?

Than a flat 10-miler?

Than a flat 10-miler?

Yeah, a minute, not per mile, but a minute total.

I mean, sorry, a minute total, right?

Maybe 90 seconds, yep.

Right, maybe 90 seconds, right? I would say the unfit person is probably two minutes slow. The really fit, planned person is about a minute slow. And this year, I asked my athletes in the training floor, we did a workout where we couldn't get it exactly right, because some of the roads you can't get on. But I asked my runners to go out really fast, early on, near 10K pace, and then when they hit the hills, to try to get into a rhythm. And it just blew people's brains in terms of what the heck that was, right? I think I might have even challenged you a little bit about what did it mean to be in a rhythm? Like, what are you talking about? This is a concept I don't really even get. And I guess my point about this, about really hilly courses to start with, and secondarily, a 10K, I mean, a 10-mile is right between this 10K and half marathon. And we talked about it, Chris. It's a race that allows you to take some risks and make some bold and gutsy moves. And if you can relax a little bit, keep your head about you, you can get recuperated and recovered from that in the context of the race, and then make another stab at it. Another stab at pushing the pace a little bit. And so what I'm recommending is, generally what I recommend in a race like this is you just try to find that comfortable, smooth rhythm and not try to run something per mile pace. The problem with that is that people will go into the zone, as we've talked about now, which we talked about at that four mile point in the 10K, is people will fall asleep, and they'll get into the position where they won't be paying attention. They won't be actively engaged in the race anymore. They'll be listening to the pain, they'll be listening to the negativity that's going on with them. So anyway, all that is a long preamble to state, a pace per mile methodology for this race plan would be foolish for you. And so what I think I would ask you to do, first and foremost, and I'm going to take a page out of the Chris McClung book here, okay? And go back to your statement of purpose, and ask yourself, why did you set this as your goal in the first place? What is it that you're trying to figure out about Chris McClung, the runner? On that day, that you've made this bold statement that you want to get under 60, you've attempted to do it many years, you're doing it and saying it on a podcast that, as we know now, thousands of people are listening to. So let's go back to the very beginning, Chris. Why is it that you want to, what is this purpose that you have to execute this race and to get under this time? Answer that for me, and then I'll probably be much better able to give you a race plan.

Well, I mean, it's evolved over the years, as we talked about early on in these discussions as we got to my goal. This year, you know, so originally, it's just about pushing myself, finding new limits on a challenging course. Now, having this as my seventh attempt, after overcoming some adversity in the last 18 months, it's about inspiring others, especially those that I coached, that, you know, you can fall down or you can fail many times and get back up and still do it if you just stay with it and keep working. That's what it's about. And when I've had challenging moments in the cycle or I've had doubts, that's what I think about. I think about my group. I think about wanting to do it, to show them, a lot of whom have had adversity or maybe going through adversity or having injury issues or maybe having not hit their goal after a certain number of attempts, I want to show them that if you just keep working, you'll get there. And for me, this is the year I get there, I believe. So that's what it means for me right now.

So here's my question. What's the worst case scenario in the last three miles of this race? What would be the worst thing that could happen over the last two to three miles of this race, knowing that this race is pretty fast, can be fast near the end, if you're able to take advantage of it? Would it be worse to be behind the eight ball, trying to catch up ground, and trying to make up ground, and looking at it later, and saying, I was ten seconds off my pace, I ran sixty ten because I went out too slow? Or would the worst case scenario be, I ran sixty ten, and I fell apart over the last two to three miles, I couldn't keep my shit together, and I faded and I couldn't kick it in?

I think you would be the former, because I feel like I can deal with the latter. You know, it's like, I mean, you've coached me a while. I don't typically blow up. I mean, I don't, you know, it's like I'm pretty good at getting a lot out of myself in a race, especially in a race that means something like this. So I think the worst scenario would be if I left too much to go get at the end, you know, and just couldn't get there. Or, you know, or wasn't able to get there because it was just too much to make up on those final three and a half miles. You know, combine that with the fact that a lot of times in this race, you know, I might be alone or have, you know, only a few people in front of me, or they might be further in front of me than I can use to really as a tool to kind of go fishing. And so if I was kind of solo on the road, having to make up more time than I, you know, could or was capable of, that to me would be the worst case scenario.

Cool. So it seems to me, based on the fact that you want to inspire and that you know your strengths and your weaknesses, that a bold and aggressive plan makes sense for you. But one, and this is my point, is one that would ask for boldness and aggressiveness to happen in the middle of the race, not at the beginning of it. And so what I would suggest to you is, you know, my general race plan for this race is to go out a little faster for the first mile and then find a rhythm and figure out how you can negotiate these hills, how to take advantage of the up, the downhills while not fading too much on the uphills, and then being in a strong position when you come out of those hills to be aggressive over the last two to three miles, right? So generally, that's a pretty sound plan for this, right?

Yeah, I mean, as I've been thinking about it, and just for context, last year I did this race, I ran one of my slower versions in a while. It was also a warm and humid day, and I wasn't as fit as normal. I ran just over 61, but I came through halfway in 30, 30 or so, which is about what I typically come through in this race, regardless of the iterations of it. And in an ideal world, I would have been able to close down that 30 seconds over the final five miles. Last year I didn't. I basically held that pace the entire race, even as it flattened out. As I've thought about this year, I would like to come through in close to 30 flat, you know, almost even splits, you know, or have the ability to come through in 30 flat and then an even split race get me to the sub-60, but one where I can close a little bit, get me even below that, you know, whatever, 59.30, 59.45, which would require a little bit more aggressive, maybe not start, but certainly the downhills in the middle need to be more aggressive than typically I've run on this race.

You're not going to get beat up. You know, I think that that's one thing that people think about on this course is that all those downhills will beat you up. You need to work on taking advantage of those. The most important thing I think you can do is to take advantage of not going too quick on the initial part of those uphills, but to take it in the old school approach is take the top, as my father used to tell me when I was running cross country, which is not to go too fast at the bottom of the hill, stay in a rhythm, and then as you get near the top to really push and push over the top of the hill, and then let yourself take advantage of the downhill. That could possibly put you in a position to be in that 30 minutes. And I think that's a good approach, looking at it from 30 minutes at the halfway, so try to get to your 60 minutes. You know, if you and I looked at this, and we were talking to an athlete other than you who hadn't run this race so many times, or myself as your coach, who's a little bit of a wild-ass crazy man, then we would say this is a really not a very sound plan. Lots of problems could happen. Why not take advantage of the last three miles? But you haven't yet been able to take advantage of the last three miles, have you?

Well, I did. The one year I ran 60.02, I was able to close, but the course was the other direction, and I think lent itself more to a fast close because you had that downhill on exposition from infield down to Lake Austin where you can really get rolling and then carry that onto the flats. Here, once you come out of the hills now, you're at Hula Hut basically running to exposition, and you actually have a slight climb there coming out of the hills, so it's hard to crank it into a new gear.

And it's really, really, really, really long way from the finish, and you have run that stretch from Enfield Road to basically to South First and Riverside thousands of times. And you know exactly how long it is, right? So there's no way you're going to psych yourself up for that. You're not going to suddenly just change your mindset. So I have an idea. You know, I've been thinking about this. I'm always obsessed with people who close, right? And I'm really obsessed with Kevin Durant right now and how he kept asking for the ball last year at the end of the NBA Finals and how he hit those shots when it really mattered. But I think that you, I think that if you are close enough to the goal time that you want to run, your statement of purpose will allow you to be clutch. And you should trust that. Don't trust your strength. Don't trust your mental toughness. Don't trust other things. Trust that your statement of purpose is something that motivates you and you feel strongly about. And run that last three miles of the race, expecting that you have to hold on and asking for the ball. Does that make sense? Like, give me the ball. I've got it. I'll make the last shot. You don't know if you'll make the last shot. You know you'll put it up cleanly and you'll do the best you can, but you don't know whether it will go in or not. But you're asking for the ball. And I think that when we do a negative split plan, we're not asking for the ball at the end. You know what I mean? I think that what you're doing there is you're sort of like, I'm hoping that somebody else makes the last shot. I'm hoping that somebody else makes it happen for me. I'm hoping that I was conservative enough that it doesn't go there. No, in your plan, it would be, I'm gonna run a great race for the first seven to eight miles, and I'm gonna trust that my instincts will take over, that my statement of purpose is a real thing, that my fitness is in a good spot. And to our listeners, Chris' fitness is very sound right now. He's probably stronger than he's ever been ever. I don't think you're as fast as you've ever been, but you're at least as strong. And I think that the cycle that you've put in this last eight weeks has been really the best strength-based cycle I've seen you put in since I've been coaching you. I'm really confident in your ability to hold on at the end. What I'm worried is, and I'm in agreement with you, that if we're too conservative early on, we're not gonna get the chance to make the last shot. And if you run 60.02 or 60.03 again and you miss the shot, fuck it, we'll get another chance. We'll get another chance to make the last shot. But I think you gotta put yourself out there a little bit and you gotta go for it. You gotta take that risk, and your sphincter needs to pucker a little bit, and you need to be a little bit nervous about it, but not nervous about what happens in the first eight to nine miles, but more nervous about what will happen at the end. Now, somebody would say, well, that's not a good strategy to be making people nervous about what's gonna happen at the end of their race. You know what? I've spent a lot of time working with champions, and almost every champion I've ever worked with watered the ball at the last minute. And I have a real strong feeling, Chris, that you're a champion in this regard, and that you're ready for this now. So, yeah, let's make a plan that puts you in a position where you have to make that last second shot. And that's basically just holding on enough or accelerating just enough to get it done over the last bit. Now, is that a real mile-by-mile strategy? Not exactly, but...

I don't need that. I don't need that.

But you don't need it. You're already going to be checking your checkpoints all along the race. Just ask for the ball, right? So my strategy point is ask for the ball at the end. You're going to make the shot or you won't make it, but right now you know you need that ball in your hand for that last minute shot. So let's go for it. Let's see what happens. And it's awesome. We've been talking about the Celtics. Some of us, we're all basketball fans here. Sorry to all our people. We're not basketball fans. But the Celtics have a really great team, and they've got a really young guy who wants to take the last second shot, and people are telling him maybe he shouldn't. And no, the only way you get good at taking last second shots is by taking last second shots.

Well, I also say, I like this, I like the idea, kind of be more aggressive in the middle than I have been in the past. Because typically it's sort of like, find a rhythm, don't overdo it in the middle because it's so hilly. But I like, be aggressive in the middle, push up and over the downhill, up and over the hills, take advantage of the downhills. Because the nice visual that that AK gave me is that last mile on the edge, racing head to head with Ryan. I ran a 5.30 in a very similar profile to what the run for the water is. You've got to climb at the end, and then a right turn to a flatter section, just like run for the water. You climb up Cesar Chavez, the south first, right turn onto the bridge to finish. So I have a good visual for making the shot from that AK. So I like it. This is good. This gets me excited.

Yeah, and I think that, again, I knew I was going to use this last-second shot analogy with you. I already had this idea in my head. But I needed you to remind me with your statement of purpose by why that would be effective for you. And for our listeners who are still questioning whether mental training is an important and valuable part of what they're doing on a day-to-day basis with their sport, I'm going to encourage you again to go back to the mental training episodes that we've talked about, and most importantly to go back to the very beginning and look at your statement of purpose. Because all I did, Chris, was ask you to check back in with the reason why you're doing this, for us to come up with a really sound plan that makes you excited about something, as you just said in your own words about 20 minutes ago, you were a little bit worried about how exactly that would all play out and what would happen, right? You're getting a little nervous. And anytime I find an athlete that's nervous, if I have the ability to say to them, go back to your statement of purpose and reevaluate, that nervousness stays, that feeling of nerves stays, but the control of those nerves is enhanced. And the ability to be able to not move the way fear makes you move is enhanced. And when that happens, you've got warriors. That's what I call being a warrior. And I'm excited to think about how this will play out for you race-wise. And another thing for our listeners, honestly, I don't give two shits whether Chris runs under 60 minutes or not. That's his game to fight, right? I'm not... This is low-hanging fruit from my perspective in terms of your long-term progression, but it means something to you. It means something to Chris to run under 60 minutes in this race. It's something he's been trying to do for a long time. What I'm more concerned with is Chris willing to take the chances and take the risks necessary to do big, crazy, psycho things. And the only way that you prepare yourself to do those is to take the risks and to take the chances and to put yourself out there. This is not rocket science. This is not brain surgery. People are not going to die. So you have a chance to be aggressive and to take risks. And I will, to the end of my days, I will ask all of my athletes under every circumstance to do as much as they possibly can to take these kinds of risks and to be willing to press the outside edges of what they think they're capable of. And yes, sometimes on national TV, you'll miss the last second shot. But if you practice and you practice and you practice, you might hit that last second shot to end the NBA Finals and go away with the World Championship. So I think, Chris, this is a great step for you along this process of continuing to be, because it's not in your nature naturally to be super aggressive. So what you're doing is honing that aggressiveness for yourself, honing being an aggressive athlete.

Well, I'm excited now. This has me fired up. As those who will listen to this, November 5th is the big day for me. So two weeks from when this episode releases, essentially we'll have the race, and of course we'll break it down and let you know all the gory details of how it goes. But this is good. I like it. I'm glad we have a plan.

Took us a long time to get there, but we got good at the end, right? For all those still listening to us, we appreciate you.

And of course, thank you for listening, especially if you've made it all the way through this one. We appreciate it. This has been episode 46 of the Running Rogue podcast. You can always check us out at our website, roguerunning.com, or on Facebook, Twitter, or Instagram, at Rogue Running. Until next time, we will talk to you soon.