Hey everybody, it is episode 29 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is Chris joining you, as always, Steve is here. Hey Steve.

Hello world.

We've got a couple of special guests today, and we're excited to have them. We've got Adam Dailey, who is a name that many in Austin may not know, but should know. And by the time of this, by the time this podcast is over, you will know more than you want to know, perhaps, about Adam Dailey. But he would be, arguably, as Steve has said, perhaps the most accomplished Austin-based runner ever.

Yes, I would say, well, at least male, most accomplished. His wife would probably be the most accomplished female.

Good point, distinguished, you know, put an asterisk there. So, most accomplished male Austin runner, but has also started several businesses, has got some interesting entrepreneurship stories, and has a book out that we're gonna talk about on traveling the world with his family of young children and wife.

And in an interest of full disclosure, he's pretty much my best friend, so just so everyone knows.

So, yeah, another asterisk there, which is my drinking buddy. Which may mean that I have to rain these two in, but it also means we're gonna get some dirt on Steve, so that's good news. Before we get there and talk to Adam in more depth, we're gonna intro as always with some current events. We've got a few things. We've also got Cate Barrett joining us. Hey, Cate, how are you? Cate is a Rogue employee and has run on Rogue AC, Rogue Athletic Club. She's also a member of the Wazel Vale in town and is gonna be on to help us kind of do the intro, which we'll talk about in just a second. So we've got three intro topics. The first is I wanna talk about a big local Central Texas performance this past weekend at the Brooks PR Invitational Mile. We had Sam Worley, who is a high schooler from New Braunfels, Kamal Canyon High School, ran a 402 to win the Brooks PR Mile. He's gonna be headed to UT next year. That's a big deal.

That's a really big deal, Chris. A bigger deal than I think most people will recognize. At this point in time, 402 is sort of passe, which is hard to say for our listening public who are not really milers. You might think 402 is a flying time, but there are so many high schoolers right now running in the sub-402 range. But Sam, I think, has been nearly undefeated his entire year this year on the track. UT got a grand, great, future athlete. We will be hearing from Sam Wardley at UT and way beyond, I believe. He's got a way of finding a finish line, as I like to say, blood in the water. He's a shark. He gets to the finish line at the time that he needs to. And I'm super excited for him to be on the 40 acres and get to watch him run over the next couple of years.

He's got some footsteps to follow in. And former milers at UT, he has, incidentally, run almost sub-four. He was just over four for his PR for the mile, four flat mid.

At the Texas Relays, which I know Adam knows is no joke. It is very hard to run fast at the Texas Relays.

It is, it is, because it's always hot and windy.

Yes, and he beat a pretty, probably the most famous current Austinite, I mean, most famous Austinite that's a runner that day too. He took down Leo Manzano on that day.

So, congrats to Sam Worley on his result. We will be watching you as you head to the Forty Acres Hook'em. That's a name to watch for those of our listeners. The other intro topic we had is sort of more preparatory. We've got to talk about Shalane versus Jordan Hasse. This is a matchup that maybe a few years ago, everybody would have sort of rolled their eyes at, but now given Jordan's success at Boston, she has now been added to the Peachtree list, entry list. So she'll be racing, at least as of now, she'll be racing Shalane head to head in the 10K distance on July 4th at Peachtree in Atlanta. So assuming that plays out, and I think again, there's some situations that, depending on how Shalane does at USA's where she may decide to forego that Peachtree race, but assuming that plays out, who do you like? Shalane versus Jordan.

I am very high on Jordan right now, but I just don't think she's got the foot speed to take down Shalane late in a 10K race, especially with Hills. I'm gonna call Shalane, but I think, I just think it'll be the Wiley veteran that gets Jordan in that short a distance. I think if it was a half marathon, I think I'd put more of my money on Jordan, and that may seem a little bit weird because Shalane is not known for her foot speed, but Jordan, though she was a great 1500 meter runner in high school and did it a little bit in college, she just doesn't have that last set of wheels usually. She's not a closer in the last 400 meters. I think Shalane's experience will allow her to get the victory. Also, Peachtree is an incredibly hard race to get right. It's really hilly. It's very hard to get it just right.

It's usually hot.

It's very hot, but of course, we said the same thing about Jordan at Boston and she killed the hills there. And of course, that's really hard to get right on your first one.

So now you're talking out of both sides of your mouth.

Listen, I picked my pony, all right? I picked my pony, but I do know that I could be wrong. So what do you think?

Well, I would pick Shalane as well. I think it's an easy choice, honestly. I think we'll have bigger, hopefully bigger, Shalane versus Jordan battles in the future, ideally at the marathon distance. But to me, it comes down to how hard it is to bounce back from a marathon and get back into 10K shape so quickly without having really that much time to rebuild. And plus, Jordan recently had a 5K on the track that was just okay for her, nothing that really blazing. And so she's showing that she's still coming back from that marathon effort. And so given the fact that she's still rebuilding, I think she's probably behind the curve in terms of catching Shalane. Now, that being said, Shalane has recently just come off injury herself and just ran the Portland Track Festival, but she ran a 31.30 something, you know?

Not comparable to what Jordan's time was.

To put her right, to put her sixth on the US list so far going into the USAs, which will have already happened by the time you listen to this. But point being, I think Shalane's in a better position just because Jordan's bouncing back from the marathon. Give Jordan another three months, I think it could be more competitive. And I hope we get to see those two face off in a marathon before Shalane hangs up her.

The one caveat to this is that Alberto wouldn't have Jordan running if she wasn't ready. So.

Which means she may not race. No, we'll see, you're right.

She's more recovered from Boston than we might be giving her credit for.

It could also be that the 5K she did on the track was just a prep race that she was.

Yeah, she did like 18 miles.

Doing in control fashion.

Repeats or something right after.

But either way, Shalane's the widely veteran. I think she's gonna take her. We will see and hopefully we'll get to see that battle play out. By the time you listen to this, you'll know. Because it will probably depend on Shalane's results at USAs. So those are our current running events. The third thing we wanna talk about in intro, which is why we have you here, Cate, is some drama, I guess you could say, that has happened in the running community and on the Twitterverse this past 10 days, really. There's a woman by the name of Kelly Roberts who writes a blog called Run Selfie Repeat. And she has been in the news recently, both in a good way because she was recently on the cover of Women's Running, but also in a bad way because she's been called out by a site called marathoninvestigation.com for having banded in races. And so there was some sort of chaos on Twitter this past weekend which we want to talk about with her and with Wazel who is currently sponsoring her that call into question her legitimacy, her authenticity as someone that's a proponent and someone that people look to in the sport, but also raises questions about banding, raises questions about who's a pro athlete and or what are the dividing lines there and also what we should see or want and expect from brands that we support. So we figure because it's running and it's all of these things that we talk about, it's worth talking about plus Cate's been passionate about as she reached out to me via text and has some insights from her perspective as a member of the Wazel Valley that I think are gonna be interesting for this discussion. So we're gonna talk about it, but before we dive in and I will say you can find a pretty good chronology of the whole story if you go to marathoninvestigation.com. Derek Murphy is the person who publishes that site. He has become famous for outing Boston marathoners who have gotten into Boston by doing nefarious things like stealing or using other people's bibs or having friends run with their bib or cutting courses and things like that. So he's doing work in our sport to try to out cheaters. And he has outed Kelly as someone who banded in races in spite of her platform. And the whole story, if you want to kind of get a quick summary of the chronology, in March 2014, Kelly ran the New York City half. She did it by purchasing a bib on Craigslist and not really knowing or thinking that she would ever get the platform that she now has. But in that race, she took 13 pictures, one in every mile. Selfies essentially with guys in the background where she was making commentary about hot guys. I think the hashtag she used was hot guys at the New York City half. And she claimed that she was doing it because she was running on a miserably cold day and she was trying to entertain her sister who was running with her. Not thinking that it would become viral, but ultimately her post became viral, got picked up in New York Daily News and it became the seminal event that gave her the platform to create the blog Run Selfie Repeat, which has now become famous in a sense and is followed by a lot of women especially. And she also has her own podcast, the Run Selfie Repeat podcast. All that was going well from March 2014 until about February of this year when Derek Murphy outed Kelly Roberts as having banded that initial race that kind of became the source of her fame. And so he had kind of stumbled upon the fact that she had banded in that race and or run it with a bib that she bought in Craigslist. So she called, he called her out in February via a post on his site. She responded in March semi-apologizing for it, at least recognizing the potential stress that it puts on a race to have someone in the race that's not officially registered. But then ultimately was outed again in June, early June of this year, when Derek Murphy pointed out a couple other races that she had quote banded by jumping in to run with friends without a bib. So then about a week after that, it became public really the debate that had been going on for a few months within the Wazel Vollet about Kelly Roberts and her role with Wazel because she is now sponsored by Wazel. And there were members of that group, which is really the kind of grassroots team that supports Wazel that weren't comfortable with having Kelly in the mix as someone supported by Wazel. One particular member, Aisha Merza, got ultimately kicked out of the Wazel Vollet because she called out Kelly on Twitter and in other social media facets. So here we are now, and we're recording here on June 20th. Wazel has defended their position, supporting Kelly, although done that with some missteps. And Kelly is apologetic, but also a little bit defiant because she believes that even though she may have gotten to her position by abandoning her race, her platform of empowering women and really talking about how all body tops are welcome in the sport really justifies how she got here. So, Cate, I'm going to take this to you because there's lots of different tentacles to this. First of all, just how did you get exposed to this story? You've seen it from the inside because Wazel has their own team board for the group. So how did you get exposed to it, and what was your initial reaction?

Yeah, I think I saw that they were partnering with her as a mousse, which is one of their women that they don't have anything about them being sponsored, but they're listed on their website as being part of their team. And they're just women who may or may not run, but they view them as role models for other areas of life. So Kelly is officially a Wazel mousse, but she is the only one who is, or at least the only one they've come out and said that they'd pay her. So when they started just kind of posting content about her, I think it was just a lot of maybe, you know, she talks a lot about body positivity and her sports bra squad. So it was a lot of posts about that. And it did rub me the wrong way, but I couldn't really put my finger on it. And I just thought that it was my own like jealousy that another runner who wasn't fast was popular or being like exposed by, given exposure by this brand. So I really just was like, well, that's my own problem. That's my own insecurity. I should put that away and just move on and follow people that I do care about.

But your views now are more complicated, right?

Yes.

So how did your reactions evolve?

So later, I guess earlier in June, around the time that maybe the other marathon investigation post came out, I just saw Aisha from the Volley team posting about Kelly. And I actually met her a couple years ago at a track meet in Nashville and had just kind of known who she was just as a superfan. She's just really active on Twitter, interacts a lot with other, like, with pro athletes. So I just saw her posting a lot, and I was like, man, this is really, really strongly worded. It was a lot of, like, liar, cheat, and really just critical of Wazel sponsoring her and just her being a role model for the ballet. So I started to dig into it more and think, okay, well, what did, you know, I never liked Kelly, but what did she, did she really do something wrong? Like, do I have a reason to dislike her now? And I think that's what, as this discussion grew and, you know, Wazel started to respond to it, and I think that's when everyone really started to pile on, on Twitter and Facebook comments. A lot of people were kind of in that same headspace as me, maybe honestly just like not being comfortable with her as a sponsored athlete or a role model. But once we found something out that we were able to kind of pin on her, it really like made things start moving fast. And the things being the banditing mostly.

Right. So, but your opinions are complicated. And from our text, you can sort of see both sides of the story. So talk a little bit about that tension within your own mind.

Yeah, she is a, I had to look at it and say, is it really then, you know, maybe it's not just that I'm jealous of her. Is it that the banditing, is it really that bad? The banditing, I, you know, I don't think you should run a race without signing up for it. But yeah, it's something that I've done. I think it's something that a lot of people have done. There's a lot of different, like, justifications for that. So then I had to think, well, if that's something that's a gray area, again, is that a reason to totally just dismiss this person or say they're not worth being sponsored? And I couldn't come up with it. And the only other thing I had left was just, you know, she appeals to, it seems like she appeals to, like, newer runners and people who maybe aren't, they don't feel as comfortable in the running world. They haven't been doing it for that long. And I thought, you know, if she doesn't seem like she doesn't represent me for the Wazel team, does that mean that, you know, the team doesn't represent me? And does that mean that I don't want newbie runners to be on the team? And is that a problem? Because, you know, the whole, the brand's platform is about sisterhood and supporting other women. And I started to think maybe I'm not as supportive of other women as I think that I am.

So does that mean as you land on it now that you're more supportive of Kelly or less? Are you still thinking that she shouldn't be a sponsored athlete?

So even since we did talk, I had one kind of revision. But I would say first I came into it, you know, wasn't a fan, was not a fan of Wazel sponsoring her. Then I thought about it some more and I thought, well, what does that say about me? That means I'm not being supportive of other newbie runners who maybe do find her inspiring. So I kind of came around and I was like, Kelly doesn't deserve all this vitriol. She's, you know, probably made this error, didn't really mean to, you know, tell everybody that they should ban it races. She apologized to the race directors. Okay, you know, maybe she's not for me, but she can still be a role model for the sport. And then just the kind of next corner I turned was that she did get popular through those, those selfies at the New York half and turned it into something about being a newbie runner and body positivity. Those are important things, but that's not how she got popular. She got popular for this stupid stunt at the half, you know, taking pictures of the guys. A lot of people have said, what would it be like if it was a man who had done that? You know, taking pictures of hot women and captioning them. And, you know, he would never be given a platform to speak. He wouldn't be given an endorsement. So I'm still a fan or I wouldn't say a fan, but I do think that she has a voice that deserves to be heard. And if people like it, I think overall her message and contribution to the running community is positive.

I can dig that, but this is a complicated story. First question I have, just because it's the most basic, is, is it abandoning to jump in a race without a bib, even if you're only running part of it with a friend? Because I've done it. Kelly was called out for two of the three times she did it for that very reason, for not, you know, for just simply running part of a race. Is that abandoning? Is it wrong, Steve?

No, I'm a race director. Had been a race director, will continue to be a race director. No, if you stand up on a starting line without a bib to start a race, take advantage of the water stops, the camaraderie, the people around you, the courses, all the things that cost money to produce, and then decide to step away from the finish line a couple yards or a half a mile before the finish, that's banditing, and in my opinion, it's bullshit. You shouldn't do it. But I don't think that somebody jumping in in a marathon and running five or six or seven miles with a group of people to help them is banditing. I'm not saying that I'm an authority on race directing. I'm not, but I am. But I have been in this community for a long, long time. I've run many races. I've bandited a few as well. I don't think any of us here today could say people should be tart and feathered, hung from the rafters, and spit and pissed upon because they are banditing a race, right? But I do think that at this point in time, at this day and age, when you choose to utilize a race for your own selfish purposes, without paying for that, and I think a lot of that is, where are the road closures, are there water stops, are these other things happening, then I think there's a problem with it. But I don't, if you don't utilize water stops, if you roll through, it's a different scenario. So I don't think Kelly, I do think there's a little bit of a gray area about buying a number on Craigslist, because the money's not going to that race, and now you're utilizing all those things. There's a nebulous gray area there that I think is, I think there's a little more reason for frustration in that regard as a race director, knowing that those dollars didn't go to the production of that race. They went to somebody else's pocket who paid for it. But then I think, guess what, the other person paid for it, so that bibs accounted for it. It's complicated.

Plus, I think in that, the first situation, you're not able to tie that bib to a person and their emergency contact information, so if something happened to you on the race course, that could be a problem. But I agree with you. If you're just jumping in to help friends, come on, that's not banning. But I gotta say, PSA, don't buy people's bibs and run races. Just register yourself. And if a race is sold out, you missed it. Register early next time. Because, one, if you're gonna toe the line, just have your own legitimate result. It's like I would never want my result listed under someone else's name on a race. Two, for the reason I just mentioned, which is that you wanna be able to tie your emergency contact information. So if something happened to you on the race course, they can get to that information. It happened in Austin at the Run for the Water. Guy collapsed on the course. He was wearing somebody else's bib. They couldn't get contact with his next, whoever his emergency contact was to notify them that something was wrong. And that became a problem. So that's another reason. But also, you know, just own it. If you're gonna be on a starting line, own it with your own bib. And by the way, support the races that you're signing up for. Because if it's local or otherwise, they're gonna have beneficiaries, et cetera. It's like, just pay your due and support the running community. So don't buy bibs. Register yourself. I do agree with that. And certainly don't run start to finish in a race. If you do jump in and help your friends, don't take Gatorade and water from the course. You didn't pay for that.

Give a donation to the charity that's participating, that's putting that on who that money might go to otherwise. There's lots of ways to give back. Volunteer for a part of the race and then jump in and run. There's ways to give back, but it's obvious that Kelly was utilizing that platform of the New York half for her own selfish reasons. Maybe it turned out that she didn't set it up for that. It turned into it, but ultimately, I don't think there's a whole lot here about... I think the bigger issues here are everyone's reactions, which is super interesting to me. How people are acting, reacting, choosing sides, picking places. To me, for that reason, this is a reasonably interesting story. Most interesting to me is the head of marketing at Wazel decided to throw a bone Kelly's way, or at least to support her in the sense of saying, hey, banditing's been done. Look at all the women who didn't have the right to run in the past. So banditing is kind of cool, and they used the hashtag Bobby Gibb was a bandit, or Bobby was a bandit. I'm sorry, that's fucking terrible taste. That's absolutely uncalled for. And that kind of attitude says to me, I'm not really interested in being a Wazel supporter, and I've been a big fan of Sally and the Wazel brand, but the head of marketing decides to go that route. That's now you just took who I think is one of the queens of the sport, and you're rolling her over. And that's bad. That's bullshit.

I agree, but I take a more sympathetic position, having seen Megan Murray's responses on Twitter. After posting that, she took down the tweet.

I just saw the first one.

She did take down the tweet. She's been apologetic. She realized she overstepped.

She tweeted that from her personal account, and then Wazel retweeted it. So it was really just, you don't want to go there if that's your... You can't say, oh, this is our employees' opinion, not ours, and then actually go and tweet it.

So there were issues there, but I'm not going to crucify her for it. I think she realizes she made a mistake. I think Wazel realizes they made some mistakes in all of the support of her because they didn't initially come out and kind of denounce Banding as a part of it. They're still supporting Kelly and have now sort of denounced Banding and have backpedaled a little bit on some of their positions.

One more note about Meg. She actually did post an apology. It was fairly detailed on the Volay social media platform. And I left a comment. Like, this was really good. Would you consider sharing it publicly? And then I haven't heard back. I think she was on vacation or something. But it was so interesting. I was like, if you're going to post that here, why wouldn't you just say that?

She did tweet a shorter apology. But anyway, I do think this, you know, in addition to the Banding, it shines a bigger issue about debate and dialogue in our country in general and how we need to all be more forgiving. That we're all living in the gray and yet we want everything to be black and white or we want to choose sides or assign blame or whatever it may be. So one of my takeaways from this is just one, listen, do your own research before you jump into a discussion so that you have an informed opinion. But two, also be way more forgiving of everybody in the midst of all of it because we're all going to say things and do things that, you know, we may regret ultimately, but it doesn't mean we're bad people or that we're coming to it from a bad perspective. So my takeaway with Wazel, with Meg, with Asha, with Kelly even, who has been pretty defined in some of these forums, is, hey, it's all good. I think we're all fighting the same fight. We all want running to be a bigger part of our, you know, our culture and to build community around running. So let's stop fighting each other and just kind of do a group hug and agree that, you know what, we're all in this together, so it's okay. We've made some mistakes along the way. So that's where I lean on it. At the end of this is love me some Wazel. I'm not going to go seek out Kelly's blog, but I can support her as somebody who's a voice in this sport.

And of course, she won't get on this podcast.

No, she probably won't. And of course, Derek Murphy, shout out to that guy who's doing great work calling out cheats in our sport. So I've got love for everybody as my resolution. What about you guys?

I do think Wazel just likes to kind of rile people up. I think that's something that we like about them. They've done that a lot, pointing fingers at Nike. So kind of having that directed back at ourselves feels pretty uncomfortable. But I think that they like, I mean, yeah, just like they like kind of stirring it up and saying, hey, Volle, you don't like that Kelly is a muse for us? Well, guess what? She's not only a muse, but she's paid. And we're going to call her Sally in her, quote, personal opinion. You know, CEO seems like personal opinion is probably the same thing as views of your company. That Kelly is a, quote, pro athlete. And I think she just likes to she likes to piss people off. So I kind of felt like I got punked.

You got trolled.

Yeah.

Well, if you're going to dish it out, you got to be able to take it and they're taking a little bit of it now. And that's OK. We know about that at Rogue, right, Steve?

We know a lot about that. I do one thing. My only one takeaway is I'm mostly interested in if other people found this interesting because when I first heard about it, I was like, much ado about nothing, man, man, man. And then Chris made me realize, hey, there's a real story here. And then listening to Cate talk about it, there is a story here, but it's much better if more than three people are dialoguing about it. So let us know if you are interested in this topic. We'll revisit it and keep checking it. If it's not of interest, believe me, the second half of this interview is going to be completely different. If one is the sister fest, the next one is going to be the bro fest. So, you know, you get your half and half.

So with that, we will wrap our intro. As Steve said, do give us feedback, comment on our Facebook page, share us, share comments via email at chris at rogue running, or you can also just use the contact form on our website, which goes right to me. So with that, we'll stop that part and then transition to our discussion with Adam. So Adam Dailey is here. As I mentioned, he may be the most accomplished male Austin runner that you've never heard of. Adam grew up locally, competed in cross country in high school, was a podium finisher, two-time podium finisher in state cross country, ran into a buzzsaw of the Howser Brothers Twins that we talked about in our last episode with Coach Barnett. Otherwise, may have been a cross country champion, went to Arkansas.

He was a state champion, too, in the 32.

I neglected to mention that. Went on to run in Arkansas, was a five-time All-American, I believe, including having a couple of SEC 10K titles. Went on to run at the Olympic Trials, 10K, was 12th in the country at the 10K at one point. Then went on to start his own business called Ludus Tours, which is a running travel company, which we'll talk in detail about. And then after that, became an author, wrote a book called How to Run Away from Home and Bring Your Family With You. Talk about that. He's now also started three other businesses since running away from home and just recently qualified for Boston with basically no training running in San Diego. So we're going to get to all of it. We're going to start at the very beginning with you, Adam. How did you get into running? How did it become a thing for you?

I mean, I would say I got started probably in junior high just because we do everything at that age. You do basketball, you do football, you do track, and somehow I just kept winning in track. And I had this interesting strategy in junior high where I'd take the lead and I just wouldn't give it up. So someone would try and pass me and I would sprint for as long as it took to hold them off. And people kept telling me, you'll never really exceed in the sport with the way you run, but it's kind of fun to watch. So that's kind of when it started in junior high, I think.

So you had pre-style early on.

Something like that. Just didn't know any better.

But then you kept going in high school and had a lot of success there. What kept you in the sport?

You know, I think, again, I joke with people who didn't grow up in Texas. I think I got almost more glory playing, you know, football on a horrible Austin High team than I did from winning state championships and track. But ultimately, it was pretty clear from an early age in high school that this was going to be a sport that could take me some way more interesting places than anything else I was doing at that point.

Yeah, I mean, I think it's interesting how you, your experience at the high school level was a little unconventional, though, Adam. I mean, you came at this thing, had a high school coach that was a football coach, basically, correct? Correct, yeah. But I was working at RunTex, which is the original running store in Austin, and that's where I first met you. And I remember you were sitting there working on the floor, sometimes just soaking in the energy. We just had an interview with Coach Barnett. I don't know if you remember Coach Barnett from Luling sitting on the stadium seats, sort of listening to us talk the whole time. We just talked about that recently. Tell us a little bit about how you're, sort of, what got you into running culture. I mean, beyond just the idea of running and being competitive and winning things, which obviously is important, but sort of what about the ethos of the running culture, maybe even Central Texas or Austin running at the time, that caught your fancy?

Yeah, I mean, definitely more in that high school period. I started becoming a student of the sport, you know, working at Runtex, and it was like you had the recent greats, you know, and you had the old has-beens, and you had everything in between, and I was around, I mean, I remember I got a job at Runtex as a freshman or sophomore in high school and thought, man, they don't even have to pay me to come here. This is amazing. All I'm doing is hanging out with runners, talking about running. I literally wore running shorts to work, which is, you know, kind of a geeky thing to do, but I remember doing that, you know, and someone saying, like, why are you wearing running shorts to work? And it was just, but it was a great period of my life where I could soak it in and I could learn from a lot. I mean, I had a lot of mentors as well in that period of my life, for sure.

Yeah, give us a little bit of an idea about what the Austin running scene was in the early mid-90s when you were working at RunTex at that first time.

Man, Austin running scene. I mean, obviously, like, you were kind of leading the charge, and Steve was almost like a little mini celebrity the first time I met him. I'm like, well, there's Steve Sisson, you know? And I started hanging out with them, and it was like, well, Steve Sisson, the runner's coming over to my house to look at CDs, and we're going to hang out, you know? So, I mean, obviously, I think you were kind of stealing the scene at that point. You know, in terms of high school, there weren't a ton of guys I had to look up to. I actually had a teammate, ironically, Win State, when I was a freshman. So I did have that, but he was kind of a, I wouldn't say a flash in the pan, but I didn't really, I didn't really understand the sport enough to really, for that to impact me as much as, you know, hanging out with guys like you, with Paul Corozo, with, with, you know, people who, you know, were impactful and had knowledge. And then, you know, you guys, you know, telling me the stories as well was, was pretty, pretty impactful.

So at some point, Steve became your coach, at least at some level. Steve mentioned you had a high school football coach, essentially as your running coach. I can't imagine he was deep in the history of the sport and training principles. So at some point, you kind of became de facto coach by Steve and Paul, I believe to some extent as well. How did your training change once they got involved?

I mean, so ultimately my coach was, you know, about a, about a 290 pound black former linebacker who just was like, Adam, you keep winning. You don't, I don't care what you do. You know, just show up at the meets, tell me which events you're going to run and when, and we're good. You know, and so it was one of those things I did. I took a lot from, from, you know, I had a coach Jeff Stewart for my first half of high school and then Paul Carroza for a few years and then for, you know, and then Steve and I'm learning all the, all the time, you know, all I was doing is learning. But ultimately I was trying different things. And at one point I think I was even working out with, with Paul Carroza and his group in the morning. And then for, for a little period, I remember some coach or something, for some reason I had to show up to afternoon practices and I was doing, you know, two a days and I would just jog the workouts within the afternoon with the, you know, my teammates basically.

What, what kind of mileage were you running then out of curiosity?

I think, I mean, first half of high school I was probably, you know, 30 to 40 type of mileage. And then, you know, I remember starting to get more like 50. And I'm sure I hit 60, you know, I don't really remember. But I remember kind of geeking out that I started doing running more and almost having the guys, my influencers, guys like Steve, being like, whoa, whoa, whoa, there's no, slow down. There's no need to go start running, you know, more mileage type of thing.

And at the state level for cross country, you ran into the Howser brothers again. We talked about them last week. They kind of owned the state for a few years. You finished third one year, then second, the next, the cross country level. What was it like competing against those guys?

It sucked, basically. So they had another guy who was like the scrub, right, the number three guy in the team, but was third or fourth or fifth in state. He was a footlocker finalist. So there were four of us, two years in a row, that made footlocker top 32 guys in the country, and three from one team and me. So it was hard. When I have a great race, I'd get first or second. Actually, I don't think I ever beat them all in cross country. So I have a great race. I get second. If I have a bad race, I got fourth. I got fourth a couple of times and had them all run past me.

So it was one on three.

It was great. I didn't know the benefit of running against competition like that. As I look back on it now, as you guys have mentioned, those guys were some of the best collegiate runners ever. So having them to compete with, they were rivals. I didn't really have any kind of rivalries other than those guys. So it was kind of cool. I wouldn't see them that often, once, twice, three times a season.

So your transition to the collegiate game, tell us a little bit about what decisions you had in terms of what your options were in terms of what colleges you could have gone to, what universities and sort of maybe what your decision making process was. We have a couple of high school kids that listen to this podcast and they're probably thinking about that transition. What was your experience like?

I mean, ultimately, you know, I probably, I mean, I could have think gone anywhere I wanted. I kind of had a free ticket to go wherever I wanted. And it was one of those things like I visited Stanford, I visited Georgetown, Notre Dame, Colorado, Arkansas. So it's always surprises people when I tell people those schools that I ended up choosing Arkansas. But I have to frame it in context. I'm like, no, Arkansas was a really good running school at the time. And that's all I, I mean, as an 18 year old ambitious male athlete, all they really cared about was how fast can I run. I didn't really care about grades or how that might affect me professionally 20 years from now or the network I'd be making from a, you know, from a Harvard type of situation. But I wanted to run as fast as I could. And people, hearing from people like you, hearing from other people who were influencers, it was like there was no other place than Arkansas. I mean, so it was like I took those recruiting visits, but I knew I was going to Arkansas. I knew I had to test my chops against, you know, the best. I knew if I went somewhere else, I'd always wonder.

You know, 10 years later, you would have chosen Colorado instead of Arkansas, as that is an option. But at that time, Arkansas was the place to be. Talk a little bit about Coach Mac.

I don't know about that, but...

I don't know about that either, but talk about Coach Mac. Tell us a little bit about who he is and what he meant to you and maybe to a lot of other young Arkansas athletes and sort of the man he was and the coach he is.

Yeah, I mean, ultimately, you know, like I said, I've read a lot. I've been coached by a lot of different styles and what the amazing thing about Coach McDonnell was the simplicity of it all. You know, he had, you know, between track and cross country, he had a dozen workouts, maybe, you know, and it was just bread and butter. Five times a mile, do them hard. Like it wasn't recover for three minutes and on the fourth one, we're going to recover for two minutes and we're going to sprint the last two. I mean, it was just, you know, three times two miles, you know, 16 times a quarter up and down a hill. It was just simplicity. And he was a great, great, great motivator. And everyone who went to Arkansas went to Arkansas not because of the beautiful scenery of Northwest Arkansas, but because of Coach McDonnell. And no one really regretted that, so.

He won 40, I think, as the count is now.

He won 42 or 43, but they keep stealing them from us.

As the count is now. Were you on any of those national title teams?

Yeah, nine of them.

Nine of them, wow.

So we won. I tell people, so as an athlete, I kind of get to cheat because I have three chances to win a national championship in college, right? I mean, I have indoor, outdoor and cross country. So I have 12 opportunities to win national title. And we won the Triple Crown one year, and then I won two out of three the other three years.

What was that like? I know Oregon, the women just recently won the Triple Crown, which is a big deal. It doesn't happen very often. What is that like? What's it like being on a team like that in track and field?

You know, it's an interesting question because there's a lot you can learn from it. One of the more interesting parts of it is I look at pictures of ourselves getting second at nationals, and there's seven guys standing on a podium looking at their shoes, like somebody in the family had just died, you know, like so sad. I'm like, it's a shame we couldn't enjoy that moment, you know what I mean? So the expectations were high. I mean, the three times we lost, one of them we kind of deserved to lose, and the other two were brutal. Like Stanford beat us by three points, I think, or something like that. I mean, it was hard.

And it was the Hauser brothers.

It was.

Again.

And one of them was literally my fault. And it still hurts.

Still holding it?

Still holding it.

So you remember more of the ones you lost than the ones you won.

For sure.

That's interesting.

So Coach McDonald, you just said he only had a couple of workouts. Tell us a little bit about what his motivational style was, if you can kind of distill it quickly into a thing. Because we on this podcast and many people out there think about coaches, and they always think about the X's and O's, right? They always think about what the actual workout was, what the recovery was, all the things you just indicated. But Coach Mack wasn't about that.

I mean, he was to a point, if something's going wrong, he would get out the journals and look. Or if the team was in a funk and he's like, all right, let me get this out. Let's look. Because he kept a detailed journal, and he'd get everybody's time from the workout. But ultimately, I mean, when you needed a pep talk, you went into Coach's office, and you came out 20 minutes later feeling like you could conquer the world. And we had a bad meet over the weekend. The whole team would run bad or something, and he'd yell at us, you know, and he'd yell at us. It wasn't, I mean, he could not have been a women's coach. And maybe he could not even have existed in the landscape that we have today with every social media and everything, but he'd yell at us after a meet, and he'd be like, go run, you know, and it's weights and eight. Everyone's supposed to go easy, and the slowest guy on the team's running 42 minutes for eight miles, or something crazy up there, you know. So it's, he was motivating in a, you know, light a fire under you, but also like, you can do this, you know. You wanted to do it for the team.

Technically sound, but tougher than tough.

Tougher than tough. The only man I feared, probably other than my dad, to this day.

Plus, he created a culture of excellence there. I think, as you mentioned, the expectations were high. So everybody expected, when they came to Arkansas, that you were going there to win the national title and run with the best in the world. So I think part of it was that culture.

Absolutely. And we had guys that were world class runners that would want to triple at conference because they see that as the legacy. And they see like, look, all the guys before me have done this, and I want to follow in those footsteps. I want to score 28 points for the team. It wasn't like, oh, the coach is asking me because he needs my points. It was like, this is what I want to do for the team.

So coming out of that to then moving into a post-collegiate running environment, you came back to Austin, from what I understand, started working at RunTex.

I took an indirect route to that. I ran professionally a little bit, then I moved to Spain for a couple years, and then moved back to Austin.

You worked with Formula One, right?

With MotoGP.

MotoGP, yeah.

So how did that transition to post-collegiate work and running play out for you?

At a college, we had some contract offers that didn't involve very much dollar signs. It was more equipment-based type of stuff, and maybe we could have made a little money. So we opted, like I said, to go to Spain and completely took off running for a couple of years and then moved back to Austin in 2002. And that's where we were working at RunTex. We were working in the running industry, and I was like, I still have something left in me. So I started picking it up back then, and that's when I convinced Steve to come back to RunTex. And it's like, we're putting the band back together. Come on, let's do this.

So speaking of the band, let's bring in our bass player, Jessica, the one who keeps it all steady. So tell us a little bit about your wife, Jessica, how you met her, and sort of, because she is, in my opinion, inarguably the greatest distance runner to come out of Central Texas ever, in my opinion. That's with, I would even put her up against Leo in that regard. Leo has the medal, right? But Jess is her dominance at the high school level, her dominance at the college level. Tell us a little bit about Jessica Cook, slash Jessica Dailey, knee cook, right?

Yeah, so, I mean, I was a five-time All-American, Jessica was a 12-time All-American. I was typically seventh to tenth at NCAA. She was typically third to fifth, so she liked to always be just enough better than me. But she came out of Round Rock. I think she won cross-country, I want to say three times, and she won track, you know, whatever.

However many there are possible.

Six, seven times, I mean, a lot. As a freshman, she won some titles, and then she just kept winning. And so we met through that. We met in 93 through RunTex training groups, you know, at six in the morning or whatever. And then we started dating in 94, you know, 23 years ago. And she's been a good partner in many ways, for sure. But she was absolutely a dominating high school runner, for sure.

Yeah, so talk a little bit about your experience at RunTex when you came back. You were there as a whippersnapper, sort of a nip at the heels kind of guy, helping everybody do everything, but a high school kid. You go to the University of Arkansas, you have great success there. You go to Europe, have great success there, starting to get involved in business. You got an MBA, I believe, from Arkansas as well. Is that correct? So you're moving in the business world, you're looking at opportunities. What brought you back to Austin? And talk a little bit about your experience.

I mean, a little bit of it is that kind of romanticizing where you're from and wanting to move back and seeing the things that were happening in Austin, seeing the things that were happening with people I did my MBA with and the moves they were making where I was in Spain. I had a cool job, but I wasn't really making any money. I kind of had a little bit of FOMO, like what am I missing? So I moved back to Round Rock, and Paul Carozza, big dreamer, had lots of vision of what things could be and we're going to be the next GSDNM, we're going to be the next Nike, we're going to be the next this. And I was like, man, I love it. I love the vision. I buy into it.

And it was boom boom at that time in Austin, Texas with RunTex. It was boom boom. It was big time.

It was. And so it was apparent from, I don't know, from a month or two after starting the job, it wasn't what we thought it was. But it was also like it wasn't that hard either. And it was like you get to hang out with a lot of friends and, you know, do crazy stuff. And it was an interesting point of our life, I think, to be in RunTex and that, you know, whatever that was, 2002, 2003, 2004 period.

The kind of beginning of the end in a lot of ways. It took about 10 years to end.

But the writing was on the wall from, I wouldn't say an early outset, but there were a lot of issues. But that being said, I mean, those were, from my perspective, my seat, those were management issues, you know. I was doing what I wanted to do or trying, you know.

So I was recently interviewed by Austin Monthly on an article about, Paul, I don't know if you got any chance to read that.

My dad forwarded that to me, but I haven't read it yet.

But I stated in there that, in that article, that I thought the Willie Nelson 10K that happened was the pinnacle, but also the beginning of the end. It was also a hell of a party, I think, if you remember that.

I was just talking about that like two nights ago.

It was a hell of a party. But I talk a little bit about, you're an entrepreneur now and a serial entrepreneur, I would say. Did Paul rub off on you there? Your dad is also an entrepreneur. He started his own debt company with a good friend of his, right? Where did you get the entrepreneurial bug? And then Chris will probably tee you up a little bit to talk about Ludus. So tell us a little bit of how you got that entrepreneurial bug.

I mean, I think obviously Paul had those chops and I learned from him and I also learned. I mean, it was one of those things like, nothing personal against Paul, but it was like there were things I was seeing and doing. I was making promises as an employee that I wasn't able to execute on because things were holding me back. So when I became an entrepreneur, I was like, look, when I promise X and Y, I'm going to give it to you because the buck stops here. Whereas as an employee, I had constantly promised, yeah, we're going to give you this and then just the rug got pulled out from under me. And that was a frustrating experience as an employee.

So how did you start Ludus then? At what point did that vision come to you and what was the segue from RunTex to that?

Yeah, so I ran in the Olympic trials in 2000 and in about 2002 got offered from USA Track and Field. Here's the opportunity to buy a bunch of Olympic tickets right at face value. And so I thought, oh, this sounds interesting. I've got a couple thousand dollars in my account and I said, I should buy some tickets. Tickets always sell, right? The Olympics. So I turned to my office mate, Mr. Sisson. I was like, I got this cool business opportunity. How many tickets do we want to buy for the Olympics?

That's how he phrased it too. It literally was it. Are you interested in joining me in this venture? It was how many tickets do you want to buy?

Yeah, so we checked down. I don't even remember. I would say it was between $4, 000 and $6, 000 for the tickets.

If I remember, it was like two, I think I was two or three, and you were two or three in that ballpark range.

And then we, I think we forgot about it for about a year. So maybe 2003, and then, you know.

Then my sphincter puckered.

Well, that was later. And then a year later, Steve's like, we're joking or we're drinking or I don't know what. The particular situation was, but he's like, you should go to Greece and figure out a way we can make. You should make this happen. Go to Greece. I have a credit card with the $25, 000 limit.

I did.

Make it rain. Go take my credit card and figure out how you're going to make us some money. And so that was kind of how the actual business got started. So I went over there with Steve's credit card and hung out in Greece for about a month.

So you started with Athens Olympics, basically scalping tickets.

Kind of. I mean, it started with tickets, but I realized ticket. I didn't know anything about tickets. So I was like, I got a couple of these with hotel rooms. So I went over and found a hotel room and put a $17, 000 deposit on Steve's credit card. And that was the start of like, we're going to package these. Because I looked at Track and Field News and what they were selling, and it was it was kind of crappy. It was overpriced and their hotel was like an hour outside of town. I'm like, I can we can do better than this.

Yeah.

So you also had access to one of the most important and critical like groups of people who want to go to the Olympics and that you had the athletes. And you as you and Jess, as former athletes, had the ear of the athletes still at that time because you had 2000. You were at the trials 2004. They're still in your friend groups. There's still people, you know, those people qualifying for the games.

I knew every almost every single Olympian by by name.

Right.

So you had you also and their families need to go somewhere. They don't trust the Greece, the Greece's and the random travel coordinator and anybody from Greece. So talk a little bit about that experience of having those folks that tie into that, how you felt like that made the business effective.

I mean, that eventually was the business eventually was was taking care of athletes and their families because it is this one group that US. Olympic Committee just completely forgets about. They don't care about track is unique in that their trials are so late, but they're not that unique. I mean, swimming similar, you know, gymnastics is similar. Like most of these athletes are finding out less than a month that they're going to the Olympics and the US. Olympic Committee doesn't care about the families. And so we saw that as a big opportunity early on with track specifically. I'm like, I know, you know, Tim Brose's parents and I know Shalane's family and I know all these people that I can connect with and that I can just they'll trust me because I'm in their world. And that extended pretty quickly to winter sports and throughout, you know, now obviously no one's heard of me, you know, in that world like so.

So you had a good run as Ludus Tours basically helping people get to major events. It started with the Olympics, but you extended to other events as well. Let's talk about the rise and then ultimate fall of that business and what you learned along the way.

I mean, so, yeah, we I was the typical entrepreneur who just kind of rode the wave, like you said, and rode it high and did really well for a long time. I mean, and moved to Italy after I lived in Greece, then moved to Germany and then moved to Vancouver, Canada for a while and just would move and set up these camps basically, wherever the Olympics were taking place. And just, you know, like a gambler, take my chips. And I'm like, all right, I made a bunch. Let me take, you know, a little bit off the table and put it all back on. This is going to be good. And I think you can see where this is probably going. But eventually, you know, it all kind of blew up in London 2012. And I saw it come in at like the Olympic trials. I mean, I went to the 2008 trials and I still believe I still think of that as like one of the best experiences of my life. You know, I was making a ton of money. I had one daughter and she had a great experience there. We were hanging out. We were sharing a flat with Steve and Ruth. And it was like this beautiful experience of barbecue and drinking beer, making money. And then four years later.

Going to the Wild Duck.

Was it Wild Duck?

I don't know. It's Wild Duck now.

Velarde's or something?

Oh, Velarde Street, which turned into the Wild Duck, I think. But yeah. So, London. And success, you know, Chris and I are entrepreneurs. We're in this business. We've recently had our brushes with fear and loathing. I had moments, right? Talk a little bit about the experience at London. I don't want you to go necessarily into all the full and bloody details, but how did Ludus go from on top to having trouble? You said you knew there was a little bit of challenge at the Olympic trials, but that's not more than a month and a half before the actual Olympic Games. The way that your business worked was you purchased in advance tickets and you purchased in advance hotel rooms or made commitments for hotel rooms, which were basically, and the blocks that you did, they were financial commitments. You were signing contracts that you were responsible for. So tell us how that played out and why it was that Ludus wasn't able, what happened? What happened in London that didn't happen before that?

Ultimately, I just, I was, you know, there's a book called The E-Myth that talks about, you know, the business and most entrepreneurs work too much on the business versus in the business or vice versa, right? And I was working, I had gone from being in the business to working on the business. And I was working on hiring and recruiting and motivating and core values and going to conferences and talking biz dev, but I wasn't selling. And I was, I didn't have my finger on the pulse. I didn't see what was selling. So I just, I just wasn't, I took my eye off the ball. And ultimately, it just, you know, overbought, didn't understand the market that well. I wasn't in London. I had an office in London with two employees and never went and visited them. And if I would have went to visit them, I'd have seen, there's a hotel on every block in London, you know? And ultimately, what I tell people is I'm like, the opening night, opening ceremonies, I lost $60, 000. And, you know, that night for the London Olympics. And then I did it again for the next 17 nights.

Wow.

I just have to give a little love to one of my really good friends. I don't know that I was around him at that time. We've had, Adam and I have had our ups and downs as friends over time, for sure. The time we got to spend with him in 2012 at the trials was so amazing, right? Oh, that was 08 that we spent all that time together. But watching you in that process and going through those struggles, I felt so strongly that our world is not fair. And it never will be fair. If you don't know that already as an athlete, we talk to athletes about it not being fair and the weather is, right? It just is what it is. But it's not fair. And yet somehow from that space, you turned this experience into freedom, into a completely different world that you're in control of. You have the ability to manipulate and manage to the best of your ability, but you're in control. How do you go from those bottom, that space we saw you in at that time, to where you are now? I'm not asking you to give me the whole play out of an entire five year period, but tell us a little bit about how that's a low. How do you climb back up?

I mean, for me, it was just I needed to figure some things out personally. And so that's where kind of I started with the idea of like, maybe I should take this trip. And that honestly was where it was. After that, I had offers to buy the business and sell to this guy or sell to this guy. And none of them were great deals. I had offers to buy the business in 2010 that were good deals. And I was like, no way, I'll do better on my own. So ultimately, I moved back here to Austin in 2013 and was kind of miserable. I didn't really like the life I was living. And so I knew I needed a change, but I didn't know what that change was. And so I was sitting on a flight looking at the destination map, and one of those airline magazines, and I'm like, this is what I should be doing. I should be traveling. And so I realized if I could travel with the same monetary outlay, basically, for a certain amount of time that I was spending in my current life, I could at least get a life experience out of it, show my kids something. And so for me, it was taking the pause and traveling was a big thing.

So you're talking about schools and mortgages and all the other things, car payments, all those other things. You took a pause on that.

I was spending so much money, not saving a dime, and it was one of those things. I think my after taxes check was $10, 000 a month, and I'm like, if you handed me this amount in cash on the first of every month, how would you like to live your life for the next 30 days? There's no way I would pick the life I'm living. The follow-up question is, well, what life would you pick? I'm like, 10 Gs? I'm freaking travel. I can live like a king for the next 30 days on 10 Gs. That led to the hypothesis, I bet I can live cheaper traveling the world than I do in my normal life, paying for daycare, paying for insurance, pay for cable, paying for gas, all the things that add up and we just think are normal.

You had four kids at the time under seven, right? What were their ages?

When we started the trip, my oldest was six. Six, four, three and one.

So you decided to travel the world for a year. You've now written a book about it, which we already mentioned. How did that play out from that decision, from looking at the destination map to leaving on that first destination? I think you went to Costa Rica first. So take us with that prep time, where you're unleashing all of these sort of connections in this world in Austin to go into Costa Rica and check it out.

I mean, for us, it was just kind of like, which destinations do we choose that we have some kind of connection with? We'd been to Costa Rica. We went to Vancouver for five weeks because we'd lived in Vancouver. So we were picking places that resonated with us on a personal level. The trip wasn't about anything other than ose, you know, personally. But we had a lot of baggage going into it. I had a lot of financial baggage. I had a Brazilian prison experience.

We're going to get to that one. We're going to get to that one. Save that one up. We're going to make sure that story gets told.

It was gnarly. The whole thing was not like this. And that's part of what I tell people, like, there's always a reason not to go. There's always stuff that's gonna come up. Your business partner might not get thrown in Brazilian prison, but there's gonna be something that comes up that's significant, right?

But it wasn't like you were on top of the world. It wasn't like you were in a safe, comfortable position. So now I have the flexibility to go do this. You were admired in a lot of shit, and it was like, okay, I'm gonna do this.

And I had four, I was not the super active Facebook guy, but I had 400 Facebook friends, and I cut it down to 150, because I just didn't want the judgment. I'm like, people don't know my story, right? They don't know this is why I'm doing the trip. They're gonna think, oh, Adam's rich, and he's saving money, or he's got all this money, and that's what he's spending, and I sold his business, you know? And for me, it wasn't about that, and I just didn't want people didn't know me, who didn't understand.

How long did it take to actually go from decision to leaving the country?

So the idea got in my head in January 2014, and by like March, April, May, we were making reservations, and we left in August. So we used miles for the whole thing, for all the big legs, so we had to plan that way in advance. So it was like, especially when you're buying five tickets.

So you had about eight months of prep. What did you have to unravel? Did you have to sell real estate and do the investment?

I'd unravel a ton. I mean, I had to get renters in my place. I had to sell personal possessions. I had to cancel these contracts by storage for my stuff, get, you know. There was a ton that went into it. A lot of work, for sure.

So the book you wrote is really, I read it. It's a great book, super interesting. I knew most of the stories, but it's really a guidebook, more than anything else. It's like the lonely planet for a person that has adventure in their bones, which is most lonely planet people. But you give some really specific ideas in the book about how to manage this. I think your first point primarily is make the decision, right, I think that you repeat that repeatedly over and over again. Tell us a little bit about the books, where the genesis for the book came from in the process. Were you thinking before you went on the trip, perhaps turn it into a book, or were you on the trip and saying my experiences of my son locking himself in a bathroom and not being able to get out, and wondering if we're ever going to be able to get him out? Did the stories create the book in the future, or was the idea on the front end to kind of think about that?

You know, I get asked that a lot. I don't remember. I mean, I feel like I've always had a book in me. I was a journalism major in college. So I just, you know, I knew before the trip, actually, I knew I wanted to write a book, but I just didn't know what the book would be, you know? And that was one of the things I wanted to do on the trip, was spend time writing and reflecting. And so, you know, I think somewhere along the trip, I realized like I don't want to write a book about just a general business book or something like that. And so I realized more and more people kept asking me about like, how'd you do this? What was your thought process here? How'd you do this? How'd you do this? And I was like, oh, you know, and one of my, you know, another mentor I ran into when I was traveling in Barcelona was like, no one's ever written a book about taking a year off family sabbatical. That's the book you should write. And I was like, huh, interesting.

Yeah.

Where did you go, first of all? What were all some of the destinations you don't have to give a ball necessarily, but some of the highlights?

Costa Rica, Vancouver, California, Hawaii, New Zealand, Australia, Thailand, Spain, France, Italy, Germany, Vienna, London, home, San Diego.

How did you pull that off with four kids under seven because I just finished a trip myself with three under eight and it's challenging traveling with small children. I can't imagine doing it the way you did it.

Yeah, I mean, it's hard. And people look at us like, you know, we're a circus act most of the time, but kids, they respond to habit. And after two, three, four months or whatever that time, it was like, that was their life, you know. They were used to being in a place for one to three weeks, you know, and they didn't, you know, that was their normalcy. So they were used to moving. They were used to, if they didn't like a place, oh, it's okay, we'll only be here for a week. You know, they were used to eating out once a day. They were used to hearing different languages. So eventually, after the year was over, the younger two didn't remember anything other than traveling, which was an interesting concept to explain to them, like we're moving into a home. They're like, what does that mean? You know, when we showed them a couple houses, they're like, these houses suck. There's no furniture. We're like, no, we'll bring our own furniture. Like, why would we bring our own furniture? I mean, it was like explaining that whole thing. You know, and it's hard to explain that, right?

How has it changed your family as a result?

I mean, ultimately, I like to think we're closer because of it. And I also like to think that they understand there's a world out there. They understand languages and cultures and things like that. That being said, the two younger ones, like I said, they don't remember specifics. You know, they see a picture and it'll jog their memory. But I like to think that, well, at least inherently, somewhere in the back of their brain, they know what another language means. Like, if they don't know how to speak Spanish, they at least know that language exists, which I don't think as a four year old, I really understood.

But your daughter, Kiara, the oldest, I've had who is one of the most precocious and amazing human beings that walks the face of the planet. Every time I'm with her, I think she's probably wiser than I am, which isn't saying much. I understand to all of our listeners out there. But she does. I mean, when you spend time with her, and probably your second child, probably not as much, but your daughter, Kiara, she got it. And when she came back, it's a gift, absolute gift.

Absolutely.

So one question I have for you, two big questions I have for you, before we wrap up this interview, or I'm gonna poke at you a little bit. The most important race that you ever won was the Capital Ten Cup, right?

Well, all I wanted to do was surpass my mentor, really. So we used to always give, why are you saying that? It's because Steve was this accomplished runner, and it became the bane of his existence of people who would come into Run-Tex. And we'd be like, Steve's great. He got fifth at NCAAs and was state champion in this and that. He ran in the world half marathon championships, and, oh yeah, that's nice. Can you lace up my shoe? And we're like, he also won the Capitola 10. He's captain. Can I take a picture of you? He was like, celebrity. So we'd always give him a hard time. And then finally, one year, I ran it, and he was like, oh, you're going to be in my club. It's over. The poking me is over.

I recently got Allison Maxis in that club. We got Tia Martinez in that club. We got a lot of people in that club.

It is an interesting phenomenon in this city that that title makes you the most famous runner in town. That's why Leo has Olympic medal, but is often not recognized on Town Lake Trail, but Steve is recognized because he won the Captain K.

Well, the ironic thing even about that race was that I was running against Gilbert, right? And so everybody in the race is like, go, Gilbert, beat this random non-Austinite. I'm like, dude, I went to Austin High, like, I'm Austin to the bone. He's a Burundian.

He went to A.

Obling Christian, and you're literally an Austinite.

No respect, no respect, so.

So that's a good question. One other question as he goes back to the traveling, I did want to get to the Brazilian prison story because I know that's detailed in the book, but give us a little taste of it as a teaser. You didn't end up in Brazilian prison, but your business partner did as you were on a flight out. What went down with Brazilian prison?

The 35 second version is police raided our hospitality area and said we were involved in illegal activity that included scalping tickets. And selling a ticket for more than face value is illegal in the country of Brazil. Most of the tickets we were selling, however, were less than face value, ironically, for that particular event. But this was at the World Cup in 2014. My partner stood up and said, I take responsibility, I'll go down to the precinct and help you figure it out. And I said, no problem, come with us. They had guns, I was a bit terrified because we've been worried about getting killed in Brazil. And then they started search bags, found a lot, about $30, 000 of cash in my bag. And so they wanted me to come. And I was like, I'm not going with you, no way, haven't done anything wrong. And they're like, you come with me, you get the money back. You stay here, I keep the money. And I had like a bunch of employees around. I was like, okay, I'll go with you. And so I went down to the lobby and right at that moment, a guy robs a bus right in front of the hotel. And all the police jumped on the guy who robbed the bus, threw him in the paddy wagon. They come back, get my partner, and I'm left standing there in the hotel lobby.

When you told me this story the first time, Adam, actually, I read it in an email that you wrote. It's literally still to this day, it's the greatest story I've ever heard from anybody's mouth ever. And in the email, it was, you're a great recontour, you can talk with the best of them, but you're also an absolutely phenomenal writer. And that email that you sent, which was basically a plea to anyone to hear the fact that you were feeling so bad for the situation, which we'll talk about a little bit more. And also, an indication that that shit got really hairy, like really, really hairy. So don't tell us the 35 second version. Let's move on. Let's move on to you standing in the lobby of a Brazilian hotel, bags of money in your hotel room that you had already absconded with and put up in the, and tickets and, and it was tickets and money that you got away, right?

I mean, they took a bunch of stuff. They took a bunch of tickets and so, you know, the next day.

Five minutes before that, you'd taken, put money in your hotel room, didn't you?

No, I was like, I'd urged my businessman to do that. And that was the rub. I was like, you're getting two foot loose and fancy free here with the way we're dealing. Trust me, I know what I'm doing. And so as we're riding down the elevator, he's like looking at me going, sorry, sorry, you're right. You know, I'm sorry. And so when we, when he goes and I went and everyone drives off and I'm like.

They kind of forgot about you.

Yes, you were left standing.

I sat there for a few seconds and I thought as much as I would like to go to the station and get that cash back, I think this is probably a sign that I should get the hell out of here. So I went upstairs, got my backpack and walked away. And then about an hour later, I got a phone call from, who's basically my best friend and my VP at that time. Rafa. Yeah, Rafa. And she said, yeah, the police are back. They're here for you basically. And I'm like, I'm not coming back, sorry. And they're like, well, they want me to go answer some questions. I'm like, I can't tell you what to do. All I can tell you with certainty is I'm not coming back there. And so, she ends up, basically her and our COO get, they bring them down for quote unquote questioning. And once they get them down there, they figure out that if you have three people involved, it's racketeering in Brazil. And so, it's a much bigger deal. So, they ended up spending a couple weeks in prison and then about three months permanent vacation in Brazil after that. They were let out of prison, but their passports were held.

How did they get out of it? What was the resolution?

You know, at the end, it was one of these things, it's kind of funny. I mean, not funny, but in Brazil, it's not like the US where the prosecutors are held to a certain, you know, they're not held to any certain level of accountability. So it was one of those things, there was the trial, and it was like, we mopped the floor with them at the trial. And it was like, we're all getting out, they're gonna probably pay as damages at this point. And then it was like, then our side was like, cool, so we can go, we can get our passports back tomorrow, right, the judge will give their ruling in the next day or so and say, no, the prosecution now has a month or something, three weeks to turn in their case. And we're like, we just had the trial, we don't understand this. And it continued, and then after three weeks, the prosecution's like, actually, I need another week. And it was one of those, and then after another week, it was like, the prosecutor's going on vacation for a month. And it was like, you guys can plead no contest and we'll keep all the money that we took and you can go home. And all along, the other two, who had done nothing wrong, my COO and my VP had been like, we'll stay years to clear our name. We will not ever say no contest, we will not ever say guilty, we did nothing wrong, we never touched a ticket. And then after three months, they were like, do whatever, we'll sign whatever document you need to get. We're out of here, we're not waiting a month for this guy to go on vacation.

Wow, so everybody got out.

Everyone got out.

So that story's in the book, if listeners wanna hear more. Give us one story from a trip, maybe kid involved, that was kinda crazy or fun.

One story, I mean, there were a lot of stories. I mean, that's the magic of travel was, it's like almost the bad things that happen while you travel. And that's kinda what I like talking about is like these things that you don't remember sitting on a beach when nothing goes wrong at a resort. I mean, that's not what travel's about. It's about the things that happen. And one of my favorite stories is this place we stayed in Italy, and it was like a go-between between Torino and Umbria that we had to choose a place to stay in between. And we just, I picked it out of a hat, looking on Airbnb the night before, and it was one of these places that was, and we pulled in, and we had no expectations. I'm like, I'm sorry, we didn't tell you, but we're having a music festival on the property tonight. And it's like in my yard, basically. And they had music and art, and my kids are playing in the yard. It's about two acres of a yard speaking Italian. It was beautiful. I mean, so ultimately, I think travel is about the people, and it's about the things that go wrong. Those are what make your story.

So when I was, I stayed in an Airbnb at the last Olympic Trials last summer, at a house where the family had taken a family sabbatical as well. They had a 12 and 14 year old. They're older now, but when they were 12 and 14, they took them out of school for a year and traveled the world, hitting some similar destinations that you hit. And the house was like a time capsule for that trip. And so it was odd to look at it from our perspective, looking at pictures and trinkets they bought on the trips and there were news articles posted on the walls about their trip. But one of the things that struck me being in that house for the weekend as we were at the Olympic Trials was this family, it seemed like their life had stopped at this trip because it was the coolest thing they'd done. Maybe that wasn't true, but that was the impression I got. At least the decorations in their house had stopped changing.

It's a little weird now that the kids are like 40 and 45.

Their kids are in college now. But how do you keep that from being the most epic thing your family has done? So using that question as a segue to talk about what you're doing now.

I mean, ultimately, my wife documented everything on Facebook. She was one of those people who, like I told you, I cut 75% of my people on Facebook. She had a different approach where she's like, I'm gonna write everything on Facebook because that's my journal. I don't have time to keep a journal, so I'm gonna document everything. So it's one of the benefits that I don't know if we realize that at that point was that there's these memories that come back, right? So every single day of the year, we're reminded, oh, here's where we were two years ago type of thing. I think it's epic, but I also think life is life and it's hard to slow down and, you know.

Well, one of the things I can tell you is, I heard recently, not from your mouth, but through the mouth of the social media world that you're still up to your old tricks though. Not training for shit, jumping into races, somehow killing it. So tell us a little bit, you just qualified for Boston, get at the San Diego Marathon, which is a couple of weeks ago, right? Tell us about the intricacies of your training program to get ready for that race.

I did lots of lactate threshold runs and...

Lots of beer, lots of quality beer work. I'm sure you did that.

I drank pretty heavily the Thursday before.

I think getting drunk was part of the reason why you ran the race in the first place. It actually is. I wasn't there, but if I know you, I would guess that you probably opened your big mouth and said a few things and someone called you on it. So tell us a little bit about why you decided to run the San Diego Marathon.

No, that's basically it. I was talking with some running slash drinking buddies and I'm like, I would love to run Boston because they were all running it and they talked about it. And I'm like, but there's no way I would want to train twice for a marathon. I just have no interest in training to qualify and then training again. I'm like, I wonder if I could just white knuckle or whatever and I looked it up, 315, ooh. But I'm like, maybe. And so then they all became super interested in the conversation. So that became the conversation for about a week. And I only decided about a week, 10 days before. And then one of them was like, I'll pay your entry fee.

Oh, that's it, it's over?

Just for the entertainment purposes.

Adam Dailey, someone pays his entry fee.

He is a Captain K champion.

What was your long run? The longest run?

I ran 10 miles.

Hey folks.

I mean, I was running eight miles every Thursday. So I was.

So you were really prepped.

I mean, I run almost every day. So I was running, I run 35 to 40 miles.

So you're in better shape than me.

I'm not a novice, I'm just not, I never, like, I ran 14 miles a lot in college and never run more than 14 since college, basically.

You've never done a 20 mile run?

The famous 14 mile long run set. How did that feel? How did the experience go?

So it was one of those things, like, again, all my buddies were prepping me on what to think and what to feel and what to do. And I ran the first 10 miles in about 68 minutes and felt like the whole time, I'm like, man, I could throw down a five minute mile at any point, you know? And then I had one of my friends jump in at 12 miles, a bandit, you know, who should be, you know, tart and feathered, apparently.

No, he just ran with you for a little while, right?

So he ran with me. And then in the whole time, I'm like, dude, I feel great. And I had another friend with me who biked for about that same time. So we're all just hanging out talking. I'm like, you know, and they're like, you're doing great. You're doing great. And I went through 20, and the next one was 69 minutes. And then I'm like, about 21. I'm like, I don't think I can throw down that five minute mile anymore. I was like, this is bad. Which I knew, that was the worst part of it, was like waiting for it. I was like, I wish, because the three or four days before, I'm like, I know I can run 15 miles at seven minute pace. But I have no idea what, just fast forward me to that part, to the hurt. I'm ready for the hurt.

Anticipation of the hurt. Anticipation. So six miles of suffering.

One of our favorite statements here is, the marathon always wins. But you did get over on it. It's nice to have talent.

Maybe, talent, tenacity.

Well, we know you're, I know you're tenacious. But I do think you're also, the talent level, that's what I wanted to tell our listeners is, don't get totally frustrated by the fact that a guy like Adam can just roll out of bed and do that. There are people who are built, been doing this for a long, long time. Many, many, many, many, many years. And all that work doesn't ever go away. And the ability to suffer and push and hurt at the level that you've had to do is not inconsequential.

Well, that's what, the buddy who ran with me the last 14 miles, like, dude, I'll be glad to get you the finish. Like, everything's going to start falling apart. I'm like, dude, look at me. I'm a tank. My body's not going to fall apart. You know what I mean? I might start puking. I might start getting blisters. I mean, I don't know. But like, my legs or knees aren't going to fall apart. I mean, I'm a strong dude in that way, you know? And I've always been built like that. So I wasn't worried about that. I was worried about everything else other than, you know, falling apart.

You put in the work many miles, maybe not, in training for that race, but for other races.

Not our recommended protocol for getting ready, but still a tip of the hat to you for your Boston. So tell us a little bit. What are you thinking about for Boston? You're running Boston 2017? I mean, 2018? Or are you going to... What are you thinking?

I have to. I mean, I can't delay that, can I?

Not really. How are you going to train for it?

TBD. When do I have to start training?

I would say for you, that sounds like you can start training about three weeks before. But for most people, I would say January. If you got started going in January one, if you made it.

That would be the, I would love to like get serious about it. The problem is like, what's getting serious? Like I'm a competitive person. So if I start trying to run 235 or something, then I'd probably be like, well, 230 is not that far off. And then I'd be like, 225 is not that far off. And then I'd start watching what I eat and drink. And we all know I don't want to be that person.

No one wants you to be that person.

You'll end up on a year long trip again. So what are you doing now? I don't know. You've started three other businesses since coming back from the trip. You're living in San Diego. What's life like now for the Dailey family? Now with five kids, by the way.

Yeah, we had last kid in last September. So we're done. We're topping out with five.

Sure you are. I've heard that one before.

Physically, it's supposedly not supposed to happen. No, so I have different Airbnb properties I manage now. So I acquire Airbnb properties, vacation rentals, and rent them out in San Diego. That's one of my businesses. And I have another business that does more or less the same thing. I bring groups to the Olympics. So instead of bringing individuals, now I bring groups. And now I do, I go and write and speak and make a little money, not enough to pay the bills, but I do that as well.

Very cool. Any takeaways from your running business, this travel career that you'd want to share with the audience?

I mean, it's the same lessons. It's team and it's focus and it's discipline. And so it's like, again, like I talk about like, yeah, it would be nice to have a Stanford degree because of the network, but I also learned so much being a part of a high caliber team where we were focused on something else. It wasn't academics necessarily, but it was something. And so I feel like that translates to family, it translates to business, so all those things.

Very good. Well, thanks for joining us. Yeah, thank you. One final question, any dirt on Steve that I need to know about?

Man, we should have got to this way earlier. I mean, yeah, I mean, Steve is so much dirt on Steve.

We'd need another podcast for that?

I don't even know where to start. I mean, I've known Steve for 23 years and we've hung out maybe a thousand times over those years and sober maybe three times, you know, so.

My favorite Adam moment has to be, we went to the, in the 2008 Olympics. I do think we both have a side business that we could actually, we thought about this for a little bit, I think, Adam, where we sat in the crowd at the 2008 Olympics. We had seats that were on the back stretch, which is sort of one of the most famous places in Hayward Field, which is where all the crowd goes crazy and they're especially cognizant of the distance runners. But Adam and I had a whole bunch of knowledge, but Adam's not that far removed and had been doing some tours with Ludus, so he knew some of the people doing the pole vault and the shot put, and I knew them because I'd just started coaching at the University of Texas, so I had a lot more knowledge about all the other events, not just the distances, but Adam and I started just talking about what we knew about during the races or during the event. And the first, we ended up sitting next to, I think it was about three or four days that was, I think that year wasn't the seven day thing, it was like a shorter cycle. I can't remember exactly, but we sat nearly in the same spot, and other people had the same ticket, so we ended up just talking to the people around us nearly every day about what was going on in the meet, and we realized, man, we should just get headphones, some kind of like a podcast-y thing where we would literally go through and comment on, oh, look over here, at the high jump, we're getting ready to watch this guy run. He's, last jump, he missed, he's got two scratches, and they're like, what's a scratch? He doesn't, he hasn't gotten over it in two, people are sitting there at the most, one of the greatest track venues in the world who don't even know what's going on, and we're like, wow, just educating people in this little window. We had so much fun talking to all these different people about our different knowledges of the sport. It was so, and your daughter was there, Chiara, who was so great to have that experience with her. It's like, had a great number of amazing experiences. That one still, to my mind, is like one of the greatest that we had, because we got to share our love of the sport and do it at a pretty cool venue, and had both of our families there. It was super cool.

The community you guys have built here is pretty neat. I texted Steve a photo last year of a Rogue sticker in San Diego on a truck. I mean, I think that is awesome. I mean, and I think, you know, I've talked extensively with Steve over the years, like, hopefully you guys will figure out how to monetize this and, you know.

We're starting to figure it out.

But I mean, a good, one thing that just came to me was a good Steve story that I like to tell. And is that when we were, I was probably, I don't even know how old I was, I was 18 or something maybe, and we were out having fun one night, and we came back and Steve somehow hit a curb on the, you know, probably a quarter mile from my parents' house and a flat tire.

The little VW Fox I had, right?

Flat tire. And so he's like, oh, let's fix it. You know, it's two in the morning or something like that. And so he's like, I can't fix it. I don't know what I'm doing. Who am I kidding? And we go home and crash on, he crashed on my parents' couch. And then, you know, at six or eight or whatever time in the morning, we go back to fix it. And there's his car parked right off Windsor and Hartford, literally like into the curb, like one wheel up on the curb, door wide open, with the tire iron on the yard. And it's like, oh, there's the car.

We found it.

I run by that, every time I run by there, I'm always like, walk of shame. It still gets me with a walk of shame.

Good thing you're only a mile from home. Well, thanks Adam for joining us. We appreciate it. It's been super interesting talking to you. Definitely everybody out there, go check out Adam's book on Amazon, how to run away from home and bring your family with you. Thanks again for joining us.

Yeah, thanks Adam.

This has been episode 29. As always, you can check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Facebook, Twitter or Instagram at Rogue Running. We'll talk to you xt time.