Hey, everybody, welcome to episode 363 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung, coming to you from Austin, Texas. My first episode of 2025, so happy new year, everyone. Thanks for being patient with my one week break from content as I was spending time with family last week as we turned over the new year. And I'm excited to be back with you this week. We're gonna be talking about race execution. We've got a lot of folks in this neck of the wood and in our virtual training groups coming to Houston to race next weekend. And then of course, there's other races happening in the winter and coming up in February. So this is another time kind of like that October, November window where people are racing again. And so I just had some race execution reminders that I wanted to run through that will be applicable to any half marathon or marathon that you might be racing coming up soon. I have some special notes in for the Houston folks as well as I talk through that. And that's certainly been top of mind for me. So we'll get to race execution. We're going to talk about pre-race, during race, nutrition, weather, pacing, and some mental prep notes as you get ready for what might be coming up. We want you to put your game face on. Before I get there, a couple of quick announcements in the Rogue world. First of all, the Rogue Renegade Virtual Podcast Group that I lead with fellow coach James Dodds is now open. We only open that two times a year in January and June. So if you want to jump in to train with me virtually via that podcast-based program, then now is the time. It's going to be open between now and January 27th for you to jump in if you're training for spring races, really targeting April and May and June races. For this window, whether you're racing 5Ks, 10Ks, half marathons or marathons, we've got training macros and workouts for you. So if you want to jump in right now, you've got a couple of weeks to do so. And then we'll shut that again until June. So now is the time. If you're interested, of course, we've also got our other virtual group open, which is the Rogue Rising group. So that's always available as well. And then, of course, if you want to train with us virtually one on one or in person in Austin or Dallas, then those are always available options too. You can go to our website, roguerunning.com, click on the train button and find out information about any of that. Or if you're not sure, you can just email coaching at roguerunning.com and we'll get back to you with information on whatever you might be specifically looking for. But essentially, if you're in adult training for an endurance race from 5K to marathon, then we've got programming for you, whether that's in person or virtual, where we can help you get your goals. So check out that if you're interested in any way. All right, let's jump in to this conversation. And I want to start with just a little bit of a preamble. One of the things that I know is hard about racing is that when you think about a race, especially if you're going for a goal, whether that be to finish a race or run a certain time, it's scary. The future is scary. And you want to know whether you can do it, but you don't know. And you can't know. It's impossible to know what will happen on race day this weekend, next weekend, or in February, or whenever you might be racing. It is impossible. And so the question is, how do you deal with that uncertainty? And for that conversation, I actually have a couple of quotes I want to share about the future from late President Jimmy Carter, who we were celebrating this week, RIP Jimmy Carter. There's a couple of quotes that he has on the future, as I was reading up on him and remembering his life a little bit this week. He says a couple of things. This is kind of the two sides of the coin with the future. But Jimmy Carter said first, we cannot ignore our gift of the future, which is that the future is a gift. It represents opportunity and it is not an opportunity to be taken for granted. And we also know that it can end for any of us at any time. No day is promised to us. And so we should appreciate the opportunity to be looking ahead into the future with excitement and anticipation about an opportunity to potentially get a goal. And so that's one positive optimistic side that will hopefully make you grateful about what you might be looking forward to on Race Day. And then there's the other side of the future coin, which he also talks about, which he said we cannot know the mystery of the future. So it is that harsh reality that while we know the future is a gift, it is ultimately cloaked in mystery and we can't know what might happen. And so that can be difficult and challenging to deal with, especially for the type A among us who want to be able to know. But I would submit that we wouldn't race, we wouldn't chase big goals if we knew we could get it. Part of the reason why we sign up for these things is because of the unknown. That's what makes it interesting. And as you're looking ahead to whatever race you might be looking forward to, I would suggest and submit that I want you to focus not on what you don't know about the future, but rather what you know and what you can control. Because when you're focusing on the things that you know and the things that you can control, then you're giving yourself the best chance to put your best foot forward on Race Day to give you the best opportunity to get what you want. And so we're going to talk about that today. How do you control everything in your power in order to make sure that you give yourself the best shot? So again, we'll talk pre-race, we'll talk during race, and we'll talk about the mental side of things. And I might have some notes and examples that I'll tie to Houston in particular, because I know that's coming up for a bunch of people. So here we go. Let's talk first about pre-race. What should I be thinking about pre-race? And for the purposes of this conversation, we'll kind of skip to race day, but obviously there's other things to be thinking about pre-race before race day, inclusive of making sure you know how to get to pack a pickup, what you're going to be eating the day before, logistics around travel from wherever you're staying to where you need to go to pick up your packet and so forth. So obviously all of those things are things you need to be thinking about, but we're going to fast forward to race day morning and what you should be prepared for on race day morning. And one of the biggest things for race day morning is making sure you understand the geography, the map associated with that start area, and the timeline associated with that start area, and how it might be uniquely crafted or uniquely affected by the specific race that you're talking about. So I want you to really understand the map associated with the start line, which means that you know exactly how to get to Clothing Drop Off, to get to the Port of Bodies, to get to your Corral, to manage and navigate the streets from where you're staying to where you need to go to get to the start line. All of that, obviously, I want you to understand, and there can be nuances to those things depending on what race you might be racing. So for example, in Houston, you have some things happening inside the Convention Center, which is where Packet Pickup is. It's also where the finish line area is after you cross the finish line. But it's where you're going to be dropping your clothing. For example, if you're dropping clothes for the finish line area, it's where you're going to be going to drop that stuff. And so being able to navigate to that spot, drop your clothes, and then leave, and then navigate from there to the start line, which is several blocks away. And the other thing that's a note about Houston is that each of the corrals has a different street on which you enter in order to get to the start line. And so if you're going to be doing Houston next weekend, then you're going to want to know how to get to the Convent Center to do the clothing drop, if that's what you're doing. And then how to get to the right street in order to enter your corral at the right spot so that you can get to the start line where you need to be. So that's one element is understand the map associated with your start line. The other thing to understand is the timeline associated with your start line. How early do you need to get lined up? When do the corrals open and close? What does that imply about when you might actually get to the start line? And is it congested? And or can you easily navigate into a corral if you're running late, or you need to get there early? All of those questions start to pop up when you're planning your morning. Again, using Houston as an example, they have different start corral closing times. I believe 640 is the earliest, and then it cascades from there depending on whether you're in the A, B, C, D, or I believe up to E corral in Houston. You're going to have different corral closing times. Houston's also set up in a way where you have pretty good high security fencing. So I recommend getting to the corrals at least 20 minutes before your corral closes so that you can get positioned in a good spot within the corral, which means that you might be standing in that corral for 40 minutes or so before you actually hit that starting line. And so how are you going to navigate that timeline? Making sure that you get up early enough, start your breakfast process early enough in order to get to the corral in time so that you can get there 20 minutes or so early before that corral closes so that you can get well lined up and positioned in your corral. Those are all variables. Now, of course, there's some races where the corrals are less rigorously managed or maybe there, if it's a smaller race, there isn't a big timeline associated with it or it's easy to jump in late and get to a good spot in that start area. But Houston is not a race that that's true. You really need to get there early, get lined up early, make sure you're in position within with plenty of time versus some other races where you can pop up late and jump in at the last minute, maybe in a smaller race and that works. But Houston and other races, certainly that's not true. So make sure you get lined up well in advance. And then, of course, there's always the worry from there that you're going to be stiff from standing in a corral or you're going to somehow not be ready to go when it's time. But I promise you, if you're executing your race well, then you'll use those opening miles as warm up miles anyway, and you'll be okay standing in the corral for 40 minutes. Houston is my PR marathon from 2018, and I did just that, standing in the eight corral before I got released to go, and it all worked out. So obviously, it's okay, but there is a mental side to dealing with standing there and the anxiety that can build as you're standing there anxiously with your fellow racers while you're waiting to get released to go to that starting line. So just be prepared for that mentally, but make sure you get lined up with plenty of time to spare. And obviously, if you were standing in line or standing in the corral for a bunch of time, you need to be thinking about, depending on whether, whether or not you need some throwaway clothes that you can discard so that you can stay as warm as possible for as long as possible. Things that you might pull from the stack of stuff you don't wear very much in your closet, or perhaps you might buy Goodwill in advance of race morning so that you can toss that to the side once you get to that start line and donate that to whoever the race might donate those clothing items to. So think about that, whether you're going to need throwaway clothes or not. And certainly if there's rain in the forecast, then I recommend staying as dry as possible for as long as possible by having a poncho or a trash bag of some sort that can allow you to be as water resistant as you can be if needed. I think currently, as we sit here today, there might be rain in that Houston forecast, which is not something I would worry about at this stage in the game. But if you are going and there's rain in the forecast, that's something to consider. Now, while you're standing in that corral, if you anticipate being there for a little bit, I do recommend potentially moving a bit, marching in place, so that you can keep those legs from getting stiff. Now, you don't have to overdo it, but every minute or two, just march in place with a couple of high knee oriented steps. Not imposing on your neighbor at all, but just keep those legs moving just a little bit, so that you can burn a little bit of that nervousness and also just keep those legs as loose as possible before you get to the starting line. We'll talk about pace in a minute, but again, especially for those marathoners, but even for those half marathoners, those first two to four miles are warm up miles for you. And so you're going to be able to start a little bit slower and get in rhythm. So a little bit of time standing in the crowd is going to be OK. The other thing to consider for your start area and for your planning relative to your watch is just what does it look like from a GPS standpoint and will your watch be connecting to the satellite or will it not? And can you rely on that in those opening moments of the race? Houston is certainly an urban start. You spend about the first mile of the race going through the buildings of downtown Houston. And so you can definitely expect that you may or may not be able to connect to GPS in that first mile. Certainly by the second or third mile, you'll be able to connect to the GPS. You just want to be prepared for that. Be ready to run by effort. Be ready to check in on your pace once you get to that first mile marker and then calibrate accordingly. But just know, just like in places like Chicago or other urban starts, you may or may not be able to get a GPS signal while you're standing and waiting at the start line, but it will come just a little bit delayed. So just be aware of how long you might need to navigate the course without having a firm GPS connection. So that's another thing to think about. And then the last thing I'll mention, as you're thinking about how and where to line up, is thinking about how you might line up in relation to any pace groups that might out there, might be out there. As many of you know, if you've been a long time listener, I don't recommend running with pace groups in any race. I tend to find that they're more often wrong than they are right. That is no knock on any individual, but just as a general theme, when I've been out running and watching races, I've generally seen pacer's, even at the biggest races, mess things up. And so my point is that you shouldn't rely on a stranger to count on pacing in a race. I want you to rely on yourself and what you've been trained to do. The other part of pacer's is that typically they're instructed to run even pace. And you're, if you're doing it the right way, are going to run a negative split race, half or full, in order to optimize your result. So you're going to need to start slower than pace. And from there, work down to a target. We'll talk about pace strategy in a second. But it all plays out a little bit when in terms of thinking about where you might line up. And in general, if you're thinking about running a certain time and let's say you're trying to run a four hour marathon, my recommendation on that is to start around 940 minutes per mile, maybe 935 to 940 minutes per mile. And so you should be starting, certainly, behind the four hour pace group, but perhaps more in relation to that pace group that's running closer to 940, which is about a 410 or 415 marathon pace. So you should be, if you're using them as a reference tool, again, just a reference tool, then lining up closer to the 410 or 415 pace group or the equivalent pacer for the half would be prudent for you, so that you can make sure you're starting slower. Now, obviously, you still have to apply your own gut and perception of pace, and if you feel like they're taking off too fast, then quickly ignore them. And even if you are finding them reliable, you're only gonna stay with them for a little bit until you can find your rhythm. But you're using them essentially as a reference point to help you ensure that you don't overdo it in those early miles. So that is a potential way to use pacers for a short bit of time. But you still want to apply your own logic and apply your own gut as to the pace and make sure you're listening to your effort, watching your watch, if applicable, so that you can calibrate and make sure that they're doing the right thing. Now, relatedly, there's some people that may be annoyed by pace groups, because pace groups can be big and they can create this kind of moving roadblock, in a sense. And so you also need to be a little bit careful about how you use them. And if you're somebody who gets annoyed by a lot of, a lot of cramping or a lot of people that are close together, then maybe you want to stay away from the pace group in order to not have to deal with that or to not worry about having to get around them at some point. And I've certainly been in races where it felt like the pace groups passing them was a bit cumbersome because you had to kind of navigate this big clump of folks. And so that may or may not be relevant to you, but it is something to just think about. Do I want to be lined up near them to use them as a potential tool to start where I need to start? Or do I want to stay away from them so that I can not be annoyed by the clump of people that might come with that element? So that's something to just think about in choices to make regarding your plan and how you're going to execute your plan based on both your strategy and also your demeanor and how you like to navigate crowds of people, especially early in a race. So those are some notes to think about pre-race. Now let's turn to things to think about during the race once that gun goes off. And for this, we'll obviously be talking a lot about pace strategy, but I want to talk about nutrition and hydration as well as kind of give a specific dedicated bullet associated with weather and managing weather, particularly when it comes to pace. So pace strategy. And I have a whole episode on this, by the way, episode 250 on building your own race plan. So I would highly go back and check that out. I also have a bunch of race specific episodes. Some of them I refer to in that episode 250 if you want to talk about planning around a specific race. Today, I'll be talking and using Houston as a reference tool both for a half and for a full marathon pace plan because that one is what I would consider a relatively textbook race plan that you could apply to any flat ish race. So what does that look like? We'll start by talking about the marathon. So for a flat marathon, I want you to use a general blueprint as follows, which is that you want to start the race about 30 seconds slower than your target marathon pace in mile one. Then you want to progress down by about 10 seconds per mile until you hit target marathon pace by about mile four. Then you're going to hold that target marathon pace from four till about 21 as consistently as you can. Then from 21 or 22 to the finish, then you're going to pick it up in two mile intervals until you get that last mile where you can obviously check in on where you are and give everything you have to that finish line. So those final miles where it might be 22 and 23, you pick it up for marathon pace by about 10 seconds a mile, hold that, and then for 24 and 25, you pick it up another 10 seconds. And then for the final mile, you give everything you have to that finish line. That is a blueprint, quote, textbook marathon plan. Now it implies that you start more conservatively and finish strongly, which is, as the data tells us, and as you can see from Elite Racing, is the optimal way to run a marathon. You are banking energy, not time. Now, some people question, well, why should I start conservatively? And they'll be, quote, losing time, and that'll have to make up later. And that's not the way you want to think about it. You're not losing time, you're gaining energy, you're saving energy for the final push. The other part of this equation, and to use a car analogy here, is that when we start the engine, especially when we're going from standing in the corral for 40 minutes, like you might be in Houston, to then starting to move through space, it's gonna cost you more energy to run that first mile and second mile and third mile than it's going to cost you to run miles seven, eight, and nine at faster paces once you settle into that groove. It's kind of like if you're in a car and you're at a red light and the light turns green and you start, you hit the accelerator and you're starting to accelerate towards the speed limit. Those initial meters in the car, it costs you more fuel to get up to speed than it does to maintain speed once you get there for a much longer period of time because you've gotten up to speed, you found the rhythm of it all. And the same is true with running. Those first three miles, first three or four miles are the miles where you're warming into the race. I like to say you're shortening the race from a 26-mile race to a 22-mile race. You're allowing your body to warm into it and start to get to that rhythm of marathon pace without overdoing it. Because if you started at marathon pace or faster than marathon pace, that's going to burn a lot more energy because you're not warm yet. You haven't found that groove yet. So we need to start the engine. We need to gradually find that groove and then get to it, and then hold it as consistently as you can with as smooth a rhythm as you can to burn as little energy as possible for as long as possible so that you have something ready to finish the race at the end. And it has been proven time and time again that that is possible if you do it the right way. If you go too fast too soon, then you will bury yourself and potentially risk slowing down significantly at the end. So don't make that mistake. Now, it's easier said than done because when you start a race, you've got all the energy and momentum of that start line with all the people around you and there's going to be a whole lot of temptation to go faster and by the way, all of your sensors and cues about effort are going to be off because of that adrenaline. So you're going to think that you're going slower than you actually are. So a couple of things I think about in order to start slow enough, one is I tell myself I want to start slow and then slow down some more. So you start at what you think is slow enough to hit that target. I just mentioned marathon pace plus 30 seconds. And then you slow down a little bit off of that and then maybe you're right. The other thing you want to see is that you're being passed. Most people start too fast. If you're not being passed at the beginning of a race, half or full, then you're probably going too fast yourself. You want to let people pass you at the beginning and then you want to be passing at the end. Because if you're not passing at the end of the race, then you're slowing down yourself. So let them pass you at the beginning. You will pass them back during the race or at the end when they've overdone it and you've managed your energy perfectly. So it's easier said than done to start slower than you need to. But it's so so important to executing a good race. The other thing to remember is that if you miss early, I want you to miss slow. So even if you were 40 or 50 seconds or even a minute slower than your target pace at the beginning, that's okay. Don't panic. Don't over adjust on the next mile. Just then from that starting point, gradually work down towards marathon pace over those first three or four miles so that you can gradually find that rhythm without overdoing it. And if you miss slow, then you should celebrate it in your head because you haven't made the fatal error of going too fast. So that's the notes for the marathon in terms of pace strategy. For the half marathon, you can be a little bit more aggressive because you have a shorter race. What I recommend there is to start at half marathon pace plus 15 to 20 seconds per mile in mile one. Mile two should be half marathon pace plus five to ten seconds per mile. By the mile three, you should be on marathon pace. I want you to hold that as consistently as you can through mile ten. And then from 11 to the finish, I want you to gradually pick it up five to ten seconds per mile from 11 to 12 to 13 and try to finish as strongly as you can with the goal of that last mile being your fastest mile. So you also have a progressive strategy, but you get to half marathon pace a little bit faster and you start a little bit faster as well because you've got half the distance to cover overall. Now, those are textbook and sort of blueprint strategies that you can apply to any flatish race. And then you have to layer in, okay, are there any course considerations that I need to be thinking about that might not necessarily overtly affect my plan, but that might be things I want to make mental notes of so that I'm prepared for when they come. And there's a couple that I can think of and this might relate to any race, but I'll specifically tie it to Houston as an example or examples. The first is that, are there any areas where there is some hill, there is a hill or some terrain to think about or manage that may not change the overall strategy, but is worth noting from a mental perspective. Houston overall is a very flat race. The only undulations really come from overpasses or underpasses. You actually have your biggest climb in Houston right before the halfway point on West Park just before you get to mile 13. You go up and over this big overpass. That isn't really that big of a deal. And in fact, in a flat race, I actually think it's a great thing because it helps you mix up the muscles that you're using at a point in the race where it's not a big deal. And so you go up and over this overpass. And so it's something where you just want to note it and not fight it when it comes. Let the pace slow down a little bit, but then get back on rhythm on the other side. Not a big hill, not a long hill, but something to note at mile 13. The other thing you have in Houston in those final three miles is a couple of underpasses where you go down underneath overpasses and then come back up the other side. Really gradual, short hills, probably something akin to that last hill in Chicago. Not major issues if you were just on an easy run, but when you're late in a marathon, they're more annoying than anything. And certainly things that you need to deal with mentally versus something that might gradually change your plan. So you want to just note those types of things. Where might I be annoyed by the course in some way, and how can I mentally prepare for that so that I'm ready when it comes and I don't let it cause a spiral or a mental spiral that might get me off my game? The other thing to think about, especially races like Houston, where you have a full and a half marathon starting at the same time, you want to think about how do those races interact with each other? Do they have the same start line? Do they all start together? Is there a point in the race where they split off? And how does that affect me mentally from either side of the equation? Usually those types of splits are easier on the half marathoners. In Houston, the races start together, and then you have a split that occurs right before the mile eight point, where the half marathoners go straight as they continue on, and then the marathoners turn right. So that's the point at which things split up, and you'll have a good chunk of the people going straight to the half marathon, and then some people turn off to the marathon. Not a big deal, nothing to worry about excessively, but it is something, especially for the marathoners, to just mentally note that that's a point in the race where you're going to have to recalibrate your effort in some way because the people around you might change. You might have had a couple of folks that you were keying off from a pace perspective, and maybe they go straight, and then you've got to take a right turn and then refine or calibrate around a new group of people. Either way, again, not a big deal, but the scenery will change, how that affects how you manage and control your pace might change, and just mentally work through that from a visualization standpoint so that you're ready for it when it comes and it doesn't throw you off your game. Again, not a big deal if you know it's coming and if you know to expect it, but it is something that I do think you want to mentally prepare for. So there's little course notes like that. There's some other, another one that we'll talk about from a weather standpoint, which is that if there's any wind out there, where might that affect me on the course more depending on which direction I'm going at different times? And that is certainly something that we'll talk about here with Houston. But it is a good segue to talking about, okay, what about weather? How should that affect my race execution? Obviously, temperature is the biggest one here. But also, wind and rain might be a factor too. So I want to quickly talk about how to think about weather as a variable. And I actually have a whole episode on this as well, episode 313, if you want to go back to that. But I'll give you the Cliff Notes version now. First of all, temperature, especially warm temperatures, is something that you absolutely have to manage and adjust for. You can't fight physics and chemistry. As much as people want to just power through, if it's going to be warm, you just can't. And there's certain rules of thumb that I tell people to apply when it's going to be a little bit warm in order to make sure that you're accounting for that weather in the right way. And you can still run an absolutely amazing, beautiful race that you can be proud of if it's going to be warm. It will be slower than maybe you wanted, but it can still be something you're proud of if you make those adjustments. Otherwise, if you don't, if you just power sovereignly through, then you will likely regret that decision. So at what point should I start thinking about adjusting pace strategy based on temperature? In general, with the half and full distances, if the temperatures are 55 degrees Fahrenheit or below at the start line, then in general, that's an all systems go situation. It's when temperatures are above 55 that we want to start making adjustments. And my general rule of thumb for that is that for every five degrees over 55 at the start, then you want to adjust by 10 seconds per mile on your strategy, on your target pace. So if it's going to be 60 degrees, then that's plus 10 seconds per mile. If it's going to be 65 at the start, then that's plus 20. If it's 70, that's plus 30 and so forth. And that may not sound like a lot when you're just talking about seconds per mile, but it's a lot when it comes to time, because 10 seconds is roughly two and a half minutes for a half marathon, and it's roughly five minutes for a marathon. So it can be a significant adjustment to your target time total. And it's one that's hard to swallow in stomach. But I can tell you that those rules of thumb have followed through in my observations with racers and have proven out over and over and over again. And as much as I don't want it to be true, it absolutely is. So make those adjustments and you will still be able to run a smart and beautiful race. Now, again, those are rules of thumb, and there may be reasons to adjust off of that, depending on humidity and other factors. But those are decent rules of thumb that I use when I'm advising athletes on racing. So do adjust for temperature. The other thing to consider significantly is wind. And where is the wind coming from? And some courses are known more for this than others. But I can tell you that in general, Houston is known to have some wind as a variable because you either have a warming front coming in from the Gulf, meaning you get more east to west winds, or you might have a cooling front coming from the north where you end up getting more west to east winds. Now, it's a loop course, and so it's going to affect you essentially neutrally over the course of the race, but you want to note where it might be affecting you more, and especially for the finishing straight away if it's something that you might have to deal with. So if there's a west to east wind in Houston, then that means you get a tailwind for the home stretch from mile 18 to 26 of the marathon and from mile 11 to 13 of the half. That's great. But if it's an east to west wind, then it might be in your face for those final eight miles of the marathon and those final couple of miles of the half, and you just want to be aware of that. Now if there are going to be heavy winds, and by heavy winds I would say 15 miles per hour or more, then that's when you want to start considering adjusting your pace for those sections of the course. So the general rule of thumb with wind is that you want to add about two seconds per mile for every mile per hour wind over 10 miles per hour that you might be facing. And so if it's a 20 mile an hour wind, that's about a 20 second per mile adjustment. So 10 seconds over 10 miles times two, it's about a 20 second per mile adjustment to your pace in that section in order to make it an even effort. Which again, sounds like a lot, but is real when you've got that wind pushing against you and I think wind is one of the roughest variables. You're going to want to adjust accordingly or at least be aware that running at a similar effort is going to have you running slower paces and you just need to accept that because fighting the wind at any point in a race until the end is going to be difficult. It's going to cost energy that you're going to need later. So adjust for the wind and certainly be aware of which direction it's coming from. If it's east to west in Houston, you're going to be facing it in those closing miles. If it's west to east, then you'll have it at the tailwind that could be helpful. But only really note it and worry about it if it's more than 10 miles an hour. Rain, obviously another variable trickier to plan for. In general, I'd say it's the one that affects us the least, especially if the temperatures aren't too cold. Certainly, if there's no Easter conditions like Boston in 2018, that can be almost impossible to plan for and manage. But Des showed us how to do it. But otherwise, I would mostly be thinking about how you might be layering, how you might be covering yourself at the start line to stay dry for as long as possible and making sure you have a hat to keep that rain out of your eyes so that it doesn't bother you as you race. Beyond that, the preparation needed for rain is going to be very, very dependent on the situation, how hard it's raining, whether there's wind involved, and of course, the temperature that you're facing when it's raining. So those are things to think about from a weather perspective that will hopefully prepare you. And I certainly wish, with all of this advice, that the weather is perfect for you on race day. All right, next category I want to talk about is nutrition and hydration. And then we'll talk about mental prep to wrap things up. From a nutrition and hydration standpoint, what should I be thinking about when it comes to race day execution? I've got five bullets for you here. The first is straight forward and you may have heard this from me before, which is do not do anything new on race day that you haven't tried in training, that you don't know works for you. Do not, I repeat, do not do anything new on race day. Stick with the gels, stick with the flavors, stick with the electrolytes, stick with everything you know and have tried before so that your body isn't freaking out with something new on race day. And you might say, Chris, of course, that's obvious, but I guarantee you, I've had the most veteran racers make this mistake thinking that they would be immune to this rule, but they are not. So don't try anything new. Your race day plan and nutrition should only include items that you have tried before and that have worked for you in training on those long runs, especially. Then the next point here is that beyond that, have a plan and stick to it no matter what and no matter how you feel. And this is something that plan should be constructed based on everything you've executed in your workouts, in your long runs so far to this point. And that subset of actions, that subset of products is what you can draw from to make your plan. But have your plan. Know exactly when you're going to take your first gel. If you're using gels, your second, your third, tie that to when you're going to be hitting water stops and when you're going to be taking salt pills. If you take them, tie that to anything else you might be taking during the race and make sure that you have the plan and that you execute it no matter how you feel. Again, I've had the most veteran of marathoners tell me they skipped their gel at a certain mile because they felt good. And you should feel good early-ish in a half or early-ish in a marathon. And you're not taking that fuel necessarily for right now, but rather to keep those glycogen stores up so that when you get late to the race, that you have energy to draw from, that you're replacing that fuel that you're using along the way. So take it no matter what. Please execute your plan. I like to tie it to mile markers or to water stations so that it's easy to execute. I also like for people to write it down. Doesn't mean you need to write it on your arm, but write it down on a paper so that you can commit it to memory that way and then just make sure you know exactly what you're taking and win so that you can execute well on Race Day. Beyond that, specifically from a nutrition standpoint, third point here is that I recommend once you start your gels or your sugar product in whatever form, whether that be chews or gels, that you come back to it then after you start every 30 to 45 minutes. Because once you get that sugar spike, that insulin spike relatedly, you're on your way, you're on a pathway to hit a trough, an energy trough. If you don't, then come back to that product in the next 30 to 40 minutes. I would generally use an interval that again, you've practiced and that you know works for you. We know and we think that higher frequency of gel and sugar products will benefit you, but you have to have trained your stomach for that. So if you haven't been taking gels every 30 minutes, you've been taking them every 40 minutes in training, don't suddenly start taking them every 30 minutes on Race Day, because you think that will be better. Stick with an interval that you know works for you and that is consistent with what you've practiced. But again, make sure you have that plan, you know exactly when you're taking, how many to have. I always recommend bringing in extra, just in case something happens or something explodes on you. But make sure you have that plan. And once you start taking those sugar products, if that's what you're taking, that you're ready to come back to it at an interval not longer than 40 minutes. Then from a hydration standpoint, getting to the fourth point here, I want you to, in general, especially if you're a marathoner, hydrate early and often. What I generally recommend for marathoners is that you skip the first water stop and then grab something at every water stop thereafter. Typically on a good weather day, what I like to do is alternate water and electrolyte drink every other water stop until I get to those final five miles. And then at that point, you can drink to thirst. Because if you stay ahead of it, then you'll be primed and ready from a hydration standpoint. So you don't get behind, you don't get too dehydrated along the way. And then you're ready to go to drinking by thirst for the end. Usually I will double up that strategy if the weather is going to be warm. And I'll actually get something, two things at each water stop where you and certainly amp up the electrolyte mix. But that's something that you'll have to consider if it's warm. But if it's good weather, start early, start often, but then drink to thirst at the end. And then from a half marathoner perspective, your hydration needs may not be as rigorous because you're not out there as long. In general, I think for a half marathon, you can rely on using your thirst cues in a race because it's not quite as long. If you're out there for two hours or less, for those that are out there for two hours or more, then you may want to be thinking about using a similar strategy, which is that you skip the first water stop and then you grab something at the second water stop and get something there after until those final three miles or so when then you can switch to drinking by thirst cues. So those are some things to think about from a hydration standpoint, but just make sure that you stay ahead of it and leave nothing to chance. As I mentioned, don't try anything new and have a plan and stick to it no matter what and you will be in good position. Okay, that's pace, weather, nutrition. Now let's talk about getting your mind right for Race Day. Actually, I have a whole episode on this, which is episode 350. I'll give you the Cliff Notes version today, which is a couple of things that I want you to think about. Just making sure you bring your full mental toolkit to Race Day. There's always a few reminders I have here. One is, of course, to remember your purpose for the day. When you signed up for this race, why did you sign up? What was the reason you signed up for the race? And why do you want the goal that you might be chasing on this day? Reconnect to that because that's going to be the thing that motivates you through the hard moments in this race. I want to make sure you have that top of mind because when the going gets tough, and even if you're having your best day out there, it's going to get tough at some point and you're going to want to remember why you're doing this so that you can kick that devil off your shoulder when it tells you to slow down. So that's one point here. Reconnect with your purpose. Second point, do the homework on remembering and writing down what your mantras are. There's two categories of mantras I want you to be thinking about. One is rhythm mantras, which are the things, the word, the phrase, the image you bring to mind when you're in the early or middle parts of the race when it's all about rhythm, when it's all about finding a groove, being smooth, burning as little energy for as long as possible. From miles 3 to 10 and a half and 4 to 21 of the marathon, that's the space for rhythm mantras. Find that groove, but what's the word or phrase that's going to help you get there? And then fight mantras for the end, for those last three miles of the half, for those last five to six miles of the marathon, when it's time to fight, when it's time to push, when you're getting tired, when things get hard, what are you going to tell yourself to fight to that finish line and to really leave everything out there? Do you homework on those mantras? I like people to get two or three in each category, and then on race day, you never know what's gonna resonate, but you'll be able to pick from that list in your head, or you might even think of something that is new on race day, and that's okay too, but if you've done this homework, then you've opened your mind to those potential considerations and you've given yourself the opportunity to potentially think of something different. But it doesn't really matter, the point is the same. Use those mantras to get in a rhythm early and to fight late when it matters. The third thing I want to remind people of is the power of visualization as a tool. When we visualize doing something, then we actually get a neurological stimulus that is similar to actually doing the thing. So it's a way to do a dress rehearsal, essentially in your mind's eye, that gives you some similar neurological stimulation as if you were doing it, so that when you actually are doing it, it's not as surprising to your system, to your body, to your mind. So do some homework, visualizing. And what I like to do in the weeks in advance of a race is to pick runs where I just visualize different chunks of the race. Visualize the start line experience, getting to that start line, navigating all of the things that I talked about from the streets and the crowds and the timeline. And navigating the emotions and the anxiety of all of it. And visualizing the adrenaline of that start line and all the people around you pushing and flying past you. And perhaps the anxiety that might come with that. Visualize all of that. Visualize executing your plan, starting conservatively, hitting that first mile in the right spot at the right pace. And then working down from there over the first three to four miles to get to that target pace. Visualize parts of the course as you run those early parts of the course. Visualize using your rhythm mantras to find that groove, find that rhythm. Visualize executing on your nutrition plan. Visualize getting through the water stops and managing those comfortably. Visualize everything. Visualize when it gets hard and what you're gonna do and how you're gonna work through those moments. Visualize getting all the way to that finish line with the goal in hand on that finishing clock. That is what I want you to do is start to finish, visualize this race and using all aspects of the executional plan that we just talked about. So then when you have to go and do it, you are ready. Your body will recognize it. It'll be familiar in a strange and weird way. As cheesy as it may sound, use visualization. And then the last thing I talk about from a mental standpoint is just thinking about what are other some tools you can add to the tool kit that might be relevant for you. And there's a few that I think about and I always mention that may or may not be ones you want to add to your tool kit, but that might resonate. And so we'll talk about three. One is the going fishing strategy that I often talk about, which is that ultimately you're in a race and there will be people that you can chase at the end. And as I said earlier, if you're not passing people at the end of a race, then you're slowing down yourself. So I want you to find that bright singlet or shirt 30, 40 meters ahead of you at the end of this race and go fishing. Put a virtual hook in their back, reel them in, pass them, and then look ahead and find that next person to chase down. But if you're chasing people down, if you're passing people and passing as many people as you can using the race to your advantage, then that will help you push strongly. Because if you're being passed, if it's the opposite, then you're slowing down yourself. So that's one potential strategy. Another is simply counting. Counting is a way to use a neutral mantra, which science tells us works as well. So I like to especially late in a race, potentially count from 1 to 60, and then start over again at 1 as a way to just take my mind off the pain and give me something else to focus on while I'm pushing to that finish line. So counting is another tool that I use. And then the last one that I'll mention here, and you may have others you want to throw in your toolkit, is I also like to think about the landmarks at the end of a race and how I can use those to my advantage. And it might be certain turns, it might be certain street signs, it might be certain landmarks that you're running across. In Houston, one thing I did in 2018, the night before the race, is I went to Google Street View of that final straightaway as you're heading back towards the convention center at the end. And I counted every street light from the time you entered downtown until the last one you passed right before the finish line. And I believe there were 10 or 11 of them across downtown. And so I started counting down with each one, 11, 10, 9, 8. And I tried to pick it up a little bit at each block, at each street light and push to the finish. And ultimately that really helped me leave everything out there to get a PR of only 12 seconds on that day, less than half or about half a second per mile. And so that's another thing I like to use, whether it be street lights or street signs or potentially other landmarks that you can use to really push through at the end. That might be a course-specific something to consider and a person-specific something to consider, but it's something else to think about as you're preparing your mental toolkit for Race Day. But don't neglect that mental part of the equation. Some of you may have heard the quote from Mike Tyson, where he says, everybody has a plan until they get punched in the mouth. And that's perhaps a harsher and more negative way of painting that picture. He actually has another quote where he says, even if you're good and your plan is working, somewhere during the duration of that, you're going to get the wrath, the bad end of the stick. Let's see how you deal with it. I think that's true in any race, even if you're having your best day, at some point, you're going to get the wrath, you're going to get the bad end of the stick, and you may put yourself there by digging as deeply as you can in that final mile. But the question is, will you be ready when you get the bad end of the stick, when you face the wrath? You don't know where it might come, and that's one reason why we do this, because there's always an unknown about it all, and it will look different probably in every single race you do. But are you ready? Do you have that mental toolkit so that you can respond when those tough moments come? So it's not just the physical plan we talked about, the pre-race and the during race and the pace strategy and the nutrition strategy and all of that. It's the mental strategy that you got to bring to it, and if you have all of that ready to go, then you control what you can control. You're going to give yourself the best chance to go crush it, whether that be in next weekend in Houston or somewhere else. So there you go. My notes on being prepared for race day execution. We will wrap it there. As always, you can check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Instagram or Facebook at Rogue Running. Until next week, we'll talk to you soon.