Hey, everybody, welcome to episode 280 of the Running Rogue Podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung. Back to you with another episode this week. Again, excited to be back after a summer hiatus. Thanks to several of you sent nice messages about my episode last week. It's good to know that people are listening and care and appreciated the poem that I shared. So thanks for those messages. Always appreciated. Also, remind you before we jump in to today's topic that you can always email me, chris at roguerunning.com. If you have feedback questions, things you would like to see on the podcast, any of those things, or just nice words. Any of those things are happy via my email box. If you're interested in taking the time to send me a note. If not, that's okay too. Today, I've got a quick hit episode. I'm going to give you five things to think about for fall racing. Many of you are right around the corner from races. We've got Berlin in a couple of weeks, Twin Cities in four weeks, Chicago in five, Columbus, where we have a bunch of athletes going in six weeks, plus a bunch of fall halves that are kicking in, or late summer halves that are kicking in soon. And so a lot of you are reaching the tail end of your training programs, about to start your taper. So I've got five quick hit thoughts for you as you wrap your racing season so that you're absolutely ready to crush it on race day. Before we get there, quickly just want to remind you that we just kicked off our training for winter races. So races from January to March, which around here would be Houston, Austin International Half, Austin Marathon in February, Mesa Marathon in Phoenix, Cow Town in early March, Tokyo, all of those fall in that window, but there are others in that window. So if you want to do a race in January to March, now is the time to jump in with us. You can train in person with us in Dallas or Austin, or you can train virtually with us wherever you are in this world. I think we've got athletes on four continents at the moment, which is pretty awesome. So you can tap into us from absolutely anywhere to one of our virtual programs. We've got three different levels depending on your volume. So there's really something for everybody. Or if you'd rather train with us one on one, we've got those options too. You can always find out more info at our website, roguerunning.com, or just email coaching at roguerunning.com. If you're not sure and just want to send over what you're doing, what you're looking for, and we can point you in the right direction. So that's a quick plug on our training. Kicking off for winter basically now. So if you want to jump in, you still can. All right. Let's talk about fall races again. We've got a bunch right around the corner. It's time to lock in, as the kids say these days, and make sure that you're fully ready physically and mentally for race day here right around the corner in two to six to eight weeks if we're looking all the way to New York. So a lot of big races happening very soon, and now is the time to dial in. I've got five thoughts for you to think about, and we're going to run through them. This should be a quick, quick hit episode trying to hit the highlights for what you should be thinking about both physically and mentally in these final weeks. The first point I want to make, which I think is the most important point perhaps of this conversation, is that getting to the start line healthy is the most important thing between now and your race day. Getting to the start line healthy is the most important thing between now and your race day. And because you're in the throes of your training, you're doing your biggest mileage, you're doing your biggest workouts, that may be challenging. You may also find little niggles or issues pop up in this window of time, because oftentimes they do when we're in our heaviest training. So it could be possible that one of those things is happening to you. But I want you to remember that getting to the start line healthy is the most important thing. If you've been training since May or June, like many have, if you're racing soon, then the body of work is what matters, not just these final few weeks. And yes, they're important to put the cherry on top, the icing on the cake of your training cycle. But to be honest, the vast majority of the work is already done. The vast majority of the hay is already in the barn. We're just in a space where we're trying to get that extra little bit of sharpening, build that confidence, make sure we're ready fully for that taper before we pull back and get you ready for race day. So in many ways, your potential for race day has already been determined. And so that final big workout, that final big long run, while sure, it's important, and while if you're healthy, we'd love for you to do it. We want to be very, very careful in this window not to overdo it, to make sure that we're prioritizing staying healthy. So we're not making decisions that are going to compromise our health, or we're not pushing ourselves over the edge, which I'll talk about more in a second. Or if we are injured, or have a little niggle pop up, that we're focused on managing that and getting healthy in lieu of forcing workouts or long runs that would be under a compromised musculoskeletal system. So I'd rather you pause on long runs, pause on workouts, than force them if your body is telling you no. Doesn't mean you don't run. Doesn't mean you don't try to do something, maybe cross training if running isn't in the cards at the moment. But what I want you to be doing is urgently, if you do have an issue, check in with a PT, a chiro, a doctor that focuses on runners, figure out what the issue is, get on a quick rehab program because the time perhaps might be short. But put the running part of the equation on the side burner until you can be fully healthy. And then when you're fully healthy again, jump back in assuming it hasn't been that long. Because again, being healthy on the start line is more important than any of these final big long runs and workouts. So prioritize that above all else. And if you do have a little issue pop up, focus on getting healthy first, or if you get sick, focus on getting healthy first, and then resume your training. Because you don't want to be digging a hole for yourself or extending the injury or extending the sickness that's going to further compromise your ability to race when it counts. So health above all else at this stage in the game. And I think sometimes we forget that because we become so focused on doing that last little bit of work. And we put all of this emphasis on these final big workouts, and sure, they're important, they're on the schedule for a reason. But are they more important than the other 20 milers you have done? Probably not in the grand scheme of things. If we look at the full body of work. So don't put too much emphasis on them, especially if you're compromised or you might be compromised if you push it too hard. So that's quick reminder number one as we go into these final stages as you prepare for your fall races. Health is top priority. Two, be precise, but don't go over the edge. Be precise, but don't go over the edge. In the race specific mode of training, which you're in if that's when you're racing, this is when we want to be more precise. We want to get close to that edge. We want to have our paces dialed in. We want to be trying to hit them as closely as possible without overdoing it in those workouts. We want to be dialed in and precise because as you get close to race day, especially as you progress through the race specific phase, precision becomes important so that you can dial into those specific paces when it counts on race day. So you want to be precise, but you don't want to go over the edge. What does going over the edge look like? Going over the edge looks like, because you have the fitness to wield, which is a very sharp sword at this phase in your training, you might be tempted to get greedy on workouts, to go too fast on workouts because you can't. And you want to absolutely avoid that. This is not a time to press the edges. It's a time to be precise, to hit the target paces as prescribed, but not more. Often in this phase of training for marathoners, one taper workout that I really like is somewhere between 6 to 10 times 800 meters at 10k pace with 90 seconds to 2 minutes rest in between each. Very straightforward workout, simple 800 meter reps, 10k pace as the target, straightforward rest in between each. That is a workout where if you're in the final stages of half marathon or marathon training, it shouldn't be that hard to do that because 10k pace should feel manageable for 800 meters. And in that workout, there will be certainly a possibility if you have, if you want to go faster than 10k pace. There will be people tempted to because they're fit and they can. So yes, you could do that workout faster if you're in the right half marathon or marathon fitness, but that isn't the point. The point isn't to push it and go faster and push yourself over the edge because you could probably do it. You probably get that workout done at 5k pace and then maybe even finish faster in the final two 800s. You probably could do it because you're going to have the fitness at this point in your build in this point of your sharpness to do it. But you're going to choose not to. Instead, you're going to choose to be precise around 10k pace and then try to make that 10k pace feel as easy and comfortable as possible. Or whatever pace you're prescribed in whatever workout you might be following. You're going to try to hit that pace, be precise with it, and make it feel as comfortable as you can. Because that's going to unlock relaxation at pace. That is then going to make race pace, half marathon or marathon, feel even easier. That's the point of that workout. It's not to put you over the edge or to see how fast you can run an eight-meter reps while fit. It's to touch on speed, do it in a relaxing, controlled way, so that then half marathon or marathon pace feels more comfortable when it comes to doing that on race day. That's the point. And yet, there will be a temptation by so many people in this phase of work to overdo it, to press the edges because they have this sharp sort of fitness after a lot of great work over the summer. That they can wield. And I would encourage you, I would urge you to not wield that sword to save all of that extra juice for race day because you can put yourself over the edge. What matters? There's a famous Lydieard quote or story, I should say, where he was at the Olympics and he had his athletes doing a workout on the Olympic track that looked a certain way. And then the next day, other competitors were watching this playout. And the next day, those competitors came out and did the exact same workout that Lydieard's athletes had done. And Lydieard looked on with a smile and said something to the effect of, you just gave the race to my athletes. Because what he had planned for his athletes was appropriate for where they were in their journey to the Olympics. And that workout likely put somebody else, especially done the wrong way, over the edge, which then gave the edge to Lydieard's athletes. And so there's this temptation when we get close to race day to make our workouts, our big workouts, race day moments. And yes, they're important. You should use them as dress rehearsals. You should be serious about it. You should put your game face on. You should be precise as it relates to your paces. But you shouldn't overdo it. As I said in my poem last week, there's a time for speed, but only when you need. And this is exactly when to remember that line. Because there's a time for workouts in certain paces, and this is the time to be precise around it, holding back as much as you are pressing the edge. So be precise. Don't go over the edge. Now is not the time to burn all the hay in the barn that you've been collecting. Number three, no one workout matters. I've alluded to this already. No one workout matters. We put all of this emphasis on the last big long run quality workout or the last big long run or that capstone workout that your coach has for you three weeks out from a marathon or two weeks out from a half marathon. We look at those things and they're big and hard and they're things that we maybe circle on on the calendar several months out because you know it's going to be tough. You know it's coming and you take it seriously as you should. But you put all of this emphasis on it. And then when something goes wrong, suddenly our instinct is to say, well, I'm not as fit as I thought. Race day isn't going to go well. And you let those final big workouts gone awry completely mess with your confidence. And you let those single data points override the scatter plot of data points you've been collecting all season. And by the way, that you also collected in prior seasons that are pointing in a certain direction, if you're looking at that overall trend line. But instead, we look at the one outlier workout here on the scatter plot, and we think, oh man, that didn't go well, then that's it. I'm not going to be able to get the goal that I want. Or as I alluded earlier, maybe we have a little niggle and we decide not to do this final workout, because if we do, that's going to push that little niggle to a full-blown injury. And then we think, well, I missed this one workout, so therefore, my race is all lost. And that's just not how it works. No one workout matters within a cycle, across cycles, in the grand scheme. It's the accumulation of all the work from the very beginning that matters. And by the way, you're carrying every time you move from cycle to cycle, you're carrying fitness and skills with you all the way to this race day that you've been building for perhaps years for those that have been doing this for a long time, or at least for several cycles for those that are newer to it. So remember that. No one workout matters. And again, I'm not telling you that you shouldn't do the workouts, that you shouldn't follow the plan to completion, but I'm just telling you that if they go awry, it's gonna be fine. In fact, as a coach, I like it when workouts don't go perfectly. Because that means that you had to stay in it mentally and focus and maybe fight through some demons in a workout that are gonna carry to mental strength and toughness on race day. So I kind of like it personally as a coach when it doesn't go well, because then you develop some mental fortitude. I worry more for athletes that have all perfect workouts. To me, that says there's something wrong. And as I often like to say, there's no such thing as a perfect training cycle. There's always something that goes wrong. A bad workout, a little injury that pops up, you have to work through. Something goes wrong, a run you miss because you were sick. All of these things are normal things that throw you off, that aren't going to derail your race day if you manage it appropriately. So keep this all in context. No one workout matters. It's the body of work that matters across the full cycle from the beginning to the end and across multiple training cycles as you've been building to this goal. And so if you have one bad day, ignore it. It's an outlier. Move on. Take the lessons you can, the mental fortitude and strength that you may have developed, but don't let the data throw you off or think that because you had one bad day, that it means you're going to have a bad race. But rather, focus on all the other data points that point to, hey, I've been doing this. I've done the work. I've been building the mileage. I've gotten in the big long runs. I've done a bunch of workouts that have gone well. I've had some prep races that have gone well. All of those things we like to ignore when we have the one bad day. But I'm telling you to do the opposite. When you have the one bad day, sure, be mad about it, be frustrated, feel the feels, as I like to say, but then set it aside and focus on the things that have gone well and that point to the fact that you're absolutely going to be ready on race day. So keep the context in your head. No one workout matters. It's the body of work. And when you have those bad days, it's okay. Feel the feels, but shake it off. Move on to the next. You're going to be okay. I've had plenty of bad days that still led up to PR races in my day. So that's number three. Number four, at this stage in the game, as it relates to the physical stuff, the most important thing, perhaps, beyond staying healthy, is don't do anything new. Don't do anything new at this stage in the game. Other than your training, and number five, which I'll talk about in a second, mental prep, I want you to be subtracting things from your life as you enter the taper. Focus on the task at hand. We sometimes want to take the extra energy we might have from not running as many miles as we get into the taper, and we get anxious, and we want to funnel that into something that distracts us, like that landscaping project that we've been putting off. Oh, maybe I should start yoga. Maybe I should change my diet. Maybe I should start running with a new group and see what that's like. No, I want you to be as boring as possible in these final two to six to eight weeks before your race day. Absolutely nothing new. Follow your plan as it relates to the running. Don't do anything else other than focus on recovering and being ready for race day. The rest can wait till after the big day. No new strength programs, no new yoga classes, no new landscaping projects, no new painting projects around the house, no new craft projects in the backyard. Nothing new. Focus all of that extra energy on extra time to sleep, to fuel, to get in the easy movement associated with recovery, and that's it. One crazy thing to me is that I'll say this to people, and of course, naturally, they're going to nod their head and be like, yeah, yeah, of course, why would I do anything new on race day or before race day? They'll nod knowingly. And then I've had a lot of veterans still get sucked into the trap of breaking this rule because they succumb to the anxiety in the nerves that they're wanting to cover up by doing something that takes their mind off of it, and so they do something new. Or they start to succumb to this idea that I did everything I wanted to do, but I wasn't able to do this thing or that thing, and so now I'm going to do this crash course in it to make sure that I'm ready to go. Now is the time to throw in some strength because I didn't do the strength program I had planned to do, so now I'm going to throw it in and see if that tops off the tank, so to speak. But that's not how it works. If you haven't done it to this point, it's too late. It's not going to help you. It's only going to hurt you. So don't add it now. If you add it now, you're risking your potential on race day. So this is not a time to add. This is a time to subtract and focus. Hone in on precisely what you've already been doing. Execute it day by day, and you're going to be fine. You're going to be okay. And then the new things you want to add to the program, you can consider for the next cycle. But save those for after race day. That's number four. Don't do anything new. Number five, mental prep. We spend a lot of time in these final weeks focusing on the physical things, the workouts, the final long runs, all of the easy days and the routine and making sure we're checking the final boxes on the training program itself. We spend a lot of time there. But I find that we don't often spend a lot of time on the mental side until it's too late, until it's race week or a few days out from the race, or maybe until you're driving or ubering to the race itself. You think, oh, maybe I should think of some mantras. That's not what I want you to be doing. I want you to be using these final weeks to prepare the mind, to prepare the mental toolkit if you haven't already been doing it so that you're absolutely ready to go. For that, I will refer you to episode 350, Getting Your Mind Right for Race Day, which is one that I shared recently, but also give you some reminders now. What does it look like to prepare your mind from race day when you're two or four or six weeks out? The first thing it looks like is remembering your purpose, thinking back to why you signed up for this race in the first place and why you wanted the goal that you might be tackling. Reconnect to that origin so that you can easily reconnect to that when the going gets tough on race day. So think about your purpose. Get into the practical details about planning around your goal. If you have a goal and you've got all this data collected, hone in on that goal based on the data collected from your workouts, and then start to translate that into a plan that is measured. Start smart, finish strong, that's going to allow you to go after that goal on race day. Translate that into something you actually write down and put on paper so that you can start to internalize that and prepare mentally for executing it on race day. Get into the visualization process. I don't like to do this all at once. I think that's impractical, but in bits and pieces, start to think about the different sections of the race and how it's going to actually be on race day in your mind's eye. Science actually tells us that visualization gives us a similar neuromuscular response, or sorry, neurological response, as actually doing the thing, physically doing the thing. So, while you can't go do the thing that you've never done at a pace you've never done it at, until you do it, you can do it in your mind's eye, which gives you a neurological stimulus, so that when you're actually doing it physically, it's as if you've done it before. So, go through the race and think through the various sections and visualize executing them per plan. You know, for example, visualize the start of the race and the chaos and the energy and the nerves and all of that, that's going to come with it, that's going to tempt you to go out too fast. And visualize working through all of that craziness and keeping the adrenaline and dopamine under control so that you can effectively start slower than you want to and work down towards your target pace over those opening miles. Visualize sections of the course that might be challenging, that big hill, that crazy downhill, that U-turn, that sharp turn, whatever it is, start visualizing those sections and how you're going to execute them to your plan so that it doesn't derail you. Visualize using the mantras, which we'll talk about more in a second, when the going gets tough, rhythm mantras for those early parts of the race where you're trying to stay calm and in control and fight mantras for the end when it's time to go fast and fight to the end. And then, of course, visualize those final miles and what it's going to take to dig deep and get that goal. And visualize the finish line with that goal time on your watch. Go through the whole race that way. And then think about your mantras. What do they look like? Rhythm mantras, fight mantras. Think about two or three in each category so that you can not only have them top of mind, but also maybe even practice them on some of these final workouts. Practice using them on some of these final workouts. And then think about the other tools that you're going to bring to bear on race day. Some that I talked about on other episodes. Counting, it's sort of a neutral mantra that I use, particularly at the end of a race. Studying landmarks that will be cues to how you're going to close things out. Also thinking about going fishing and visualizing that as a tool. Finding those people that might be 30 seconds ahead and chasing them down as a carrot to get to that finish line. There's a whole host of things that you may have heard on this podcast, tried before, but just think about them. Visualize using them. Rebuild that toolkit. Put those arrows in your quiver so that you have it all prepared for race day so that you're not cramming or doing a cram session those final few days. The physical prep is coming to an end. All of those or a few of those big workouts might still be ahead of you. Yes, you're going to naturally focus on those because it's easy to focus on those. But don't neglect the mental prep. If you haven't already started, start it now so that you're ready to go when that gun goes off. And there you go. That's it. Quick hit episode today. Those are five things to be thinking about before your fall race as it's approaching quickly. Again, one, staying healthy is best. Don't push it too much now. Or if you need to skip something to stay healthy and get ready for a healthy start line experience, then that's more important. Two, precise. Be precise, but don't go over the edge. Now is not the time to be greedy. Three, no one workout matters more than the rest. Operate accordingly and don't let one bad workout derail you. Four, nothing new right now, just the things that you know and you've already been doing to get you ready. And then five, of course, spend time on that mental prep, because when it comes to big races, the mental is maybe as important as the physical when it's all said and done. So there you go. I'm excited for everybody with these races coming up. Do these five things to get your game face on, and I would love to hear how some of those races go as we progress through the fall. With that, I'll wrap it here. As always, you can check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Facebook or Instagram at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.