Hey everybody, it is episode 23 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is Chris, one of your co-hosts. I am still waiting on my second co-host, Steve, for some scheduling reasons. I'm kicking this off without him because I was able to secure the one and only Allison Macsas as a quick intro guest so we can get some reactions from her second place overall finish at the Vancouver Marathon now 10 days ago. And so we've got Allison here, wanted to get a quick intro and some questions from her. And then we'll bring Steve on to react to that, as well as talk about some other intro things before we get into today's topic. Today's topic, we are talking about the coach athlete relationship and giving you some tips on that. And we're also gonna have, Steve and I are gonna have a coach athlete conversation with him, basically coaching me on what's next for me in training. So we'll get to that in a second. First, welcome Allison, good to have you back.

Thanks, good to be back.

Allison was our episode two guest, so check that out if you haven't already. So as we start, before we dive into the race itself, Allison, I know you had a lot of anxiety and trepidation about switching to the marathon because the original plan was to do the half in Vancouver and you didn't really do any traditional marathon training leading up to this one. So talk about the decision to make to switch the race and what was going through your mind as you made that decision and then ultimately stepped into the race not sure.

Yeah, so I really didn't have any kind of traditional lead up for a marathon or a half marathon. I had been in Morocco with Rogue Expeditions up until really about three and a half, four weeks before the race. So I had been running a lot, but it was all trail running, it was hiking, it was guiding, no workouts, nothing like that. I had not run 20 miles since the Austin Marathon in February, which I was also not very prepared for. So it had been an interesting few months. I figured I could swing a half marathon by coming back. Steve said he'd put me on the track a few times, sharpen up, go out and do my best. So I did get on the track a few times when I got home. Had good workouts, but it was 5K work. And I guess I had the race director reach out to me, or the elite coordinator, Lynn Kanuka, reached out and wanted me to consider switching to the marathon. I think the field was a little light, and I've been up there six times, and she kind of knows I'm better at longer distances, and just kind of wanted me to try. So I considered it, and my thought, I guess, was that I was not really prepared for a marathon or a half marathon. And so if I was just gonna run an okay race, kind of just show up and call it a day at work, there's a little more money in the marathon, and I just sort of went for it. But yeah, once I got up there and getting on the starting line, I was really nervous. I was more nervous than I'd been in a while for a race, kind of really second-guessing the decision and wondering why I thought I could show up and race a marathon with no training.

Were those nerves because you didn't think you were ready or because you knew that you could win and that might be on the line?

Oh, because I didn't think I was ready. I knew I could run an okay marathon, but I figured it was gonna hurt and it was gonna be a very painful way to race a marathon. I was definitely, the half marathon there also begins an hour and a half before the marathon, so it was over before we even got on the starting line. And I think hearing the results and knowing that they were all finished already just really was making me second guess the decision.

You were jealous you wanted to be done and having a beer.

Very much so.

I think all marathoners can relate to that feeling. So you get into the race and it goes out pretty fast, at least upfront.

Yes, very fast.

And you find yourself alone, I would assume fairly quickly. Take us through your mindset early on.

Early on, I'm pretty good at feeling out paces, kind of knowing where my effort level should be. And of course, up there, everything's in kilometers, not miles, which I actually prefer. I think the kilometer markers come a lot faster. So you have a constant sense of progress. You see those signs every three minutes and 50 seconds or so rather than going by miles. So early on, I actually, there was a small crew of guys that I was running with and there was one man in particular, he was older, told me, he's like, oh, I'm running 236, what are you trying to run? I was like, well, not 236. If I can be low 240s, I'll be happy. He's like, well, you're going 236 pace right now, so just run with me, just come run 236. So I ran with him for a while and he actually pointed up at the girl who was in second place, Ludmila. And he was like, oh, don't worry about her, she's gonna fall off. I was like, I don't know, cause I knew her history. She used to be a 229 marathoner, she's older now. She's legit, she won the race two years ago in 237. But she did go out very, very fast. I mean, she was with a crew of guys who ended up running sub 230. And I mean, I didn't go anywhere near them. I had no business doing that. So I was definitely running fast at the beginning, but it felt good. And I think in my head, I just, I knew at some point I was gonna pay for it. But you know, we had a perfect weather day. It was, the first half of that course is pretty runnable. So I had a little bit of company for a while, and then I was pretty much alone after that, aside from the bike lead, cause they had a bike lead for the top three.

Did you have doubts at any point? You find yourself alone, you're thinking, goodness, why am I doing this? Were there those questions?

Well, even at the 15K mark, there's a U-turn. And so you can see exactly where you are at that point. And fourth and fifth were not far behind at all. So I actually had a point, you know, a week before going in on paper, I was like, oh, maybe I'll win. This would be really cool. And at that point, I was kind of like, I might not even be top five if I fall apart and these people stay strong. So I actually felt really good, but my mind was playing some serious negative games.

And the race progresses. I assume at some point, at what point did you realize second place was coming back?

So the bike lead that I had from probably 20K on was actually giving me updates. She was on a radio, I guess, and she would tell me, okay, second place just crossed whatever point. So I knew she wasn't too far ahead, a few minutes, but nothing crazy. But I don't think in my head, it really clicked that I was gonna catch her or that gap was gonna close. It was just more trying to hold it together. Probably around 30K was where I started, when she started giving me those updates, and I realized that gap was getting smaller. And it was probably 33K. I actually had a friend, a woman named Karen, who did our bend trip with Rogue Expeditions last summer. She lives in Vancouver, and she came out on her bike, and she was amazing. I didn't know any other spectators out there. She was the only personal friend I had out on the course. And I probably saw her 15, 20 times during the race. And she kept showing up and telling me what the gap was and telling me I was gonna catch her. And I was just waiting for the wheels to come off around 30K or so, because that tends to happen in marathons. And I knew I had gone out fast, but it just kept not happening. And around 33K, I got on the seawall, and suddenly I could see second place, and it sort of clicked that I might actually catch this girl.

Did you try to go after her, or did you stay in your rhythm?

I think I went after her. It wasn't a conscious decision, but there's an innate reflex in racing, and once you can see someone, you kind of start picking it up, and I could tell she was hurting. And I caught up to her pretty fast. Once I could see her, the gap was pretty small. And I think it was about 35K or so when I passed her, and it was pretty clear she wasn't gonna go with me. She went out way too fast.

What was your mindset preparing for the pass? Because I've been in that place in a race when I'm trying to pass someone to get onto a podium, and you're thinking, I've got to do this definitively so that they can't react. Now, maybe in a marathon, it's different, especially that far from the finish, but what were you thinking as you went by her?

I think at first I was kind of expecting her to come back just because I know she's a very, very tough racer. She's older, experienced, she's raced at very high levels, and I just see her as a very fierce competitor, and so I just was kind of expecting her to pass me right back.

And you finished second to her a couple years ago, right? Have you actually raced her directly?

No, I have not actually raced her. Every year she's been in the marathon, and I raced the half. She was injured last year. So no, we have not actually raced each other before. But I think once my bike league got close to her, she picked up on the bike behind her and started looking over her shoulder, and she looked pretty scared, so that was a bit of a confidence booster. So I passed her. I said, good job, which I meant, but sometimes that can be, when you're in a bad place, that can be a little bit intimidating, so I kind of hoped that would work. But I mean, I just still felt really good. I couldn't figure out why I felt so good at that point in the race, but. This is about 35K. 35, 36K. And so by that point, I was like, I'm gonna be good till the end. It might start hurting, but it was not gonna fall apart. And she just didn't look good. But I didn't look behind me, I just passed her, and then a few minutes later, Karen, the friend on the bike, showed up again and just reconfirmed, that gap's huge, she's not coming with you. Don't worry about it.

And so then you're looking at to lead her, you're probably not, because that seawall there, because I've run along that seawall, and you sort of have, it's sort of curved, where you're looping around, you sort of have these points where you can't see that far ahead, but every time you turn a corner, you get another beautiful view and another stretch of seawall. But you're really not able to see that far ahead. So when did you realize the leader was coming back?

Not until I got off the seawall. So it was at about 40K, it was just like about a mile and a half left. You kind of turn, you make a right off the seawall, you kind of come back into downtown, and that's where the crowds come back. You kind of get up on this, you make a right and you kind of run uphill on a piece of pavement and then you get on a sidewalk. And I think it was that point people, there were actually crowds again, and they were all yelling, you're gonna catch first, you're gonna get first, and I still didn't see her. And so I was like, I don't know what they're talking about. And at this point, the wheels weren't coming off, but they were getting shaky. And so I wasn't gonna accelerate at that point, it was just hold it together, get to the finish. And right as I turned onto the sidewalk, so that's two turns before the finish, then I saw her, Gladys, who ended up winning, and she looked really bad. I know it was her first marathon. She's a legit runner, she's run a 111 half, but it was her first marathon, but it was clear her wheels came off a while ago. And so I knew at that point, I couldn't really accelerate at that point, and it was just gonna be a matter of whether I passed her before the finish or not, because I was definitely moving faster than she was, but I couldn't push anymore. So it was just kind of a steady creep up, creep up, and everyone's going crazy. And I think we made that left hand turn onto the street where the finish line was, but you still probably got 400 meters at that point. So it's a ways. And I came up to her, it kind of started to click like, I might actually beat this girl. This would be crazy. Because I've been pretty resigned to third place for almost the entire race. And so I came up next to her shoulder to shoulder, about 300 meters to go. And part of my brain was thinking, don't let her know you're here, try to strategize. And the other part of my brain just saw the finish line and said, get to it right now. So I came up next to her and she kind of looked over at me and she had just enough to accelerate and run scared. And I just couldn't do it at that point.

She must have been shocked to see you though.

I think so. She had led the whole race with no competition. And maybe if I hadn't let her know I was there, I could have clipped her at the line, but people were yelling, she would have figured it out.

So what did that feel like? What were the emotions, the adrenaline of it? You had to have gotten some kind of adrenaline rush as you did it, and then maybe some disappointment that followed when you couldn't finish it. So how did you feel?

I wouldn't say there was actually disappointment. It would have been amazing to win. Like that would have been absolutely awesome. But at the same time, I was still so happy just to be in second, because I was expecting to be third. I mean, early on, I was worried about being top five. So even to be in second, I was super happy with. And I still didn't realize I was going to PR until I crossed the finish line. So once I realized she was going to win when she made that move and I had nothing to do, I couldn't chase her down at that point. I mean, I was super happy with second. And I expected, because I kind of stopped running splits or paying close attention after 30K or so. I'd just been racing. And I figured I was going to come in around 241, 242, which I was going to be very happy with considering no training, no prep, no business running a marathon. And it wasn't until across the finish line and I saw it was 239 and change. And that was such a, I mean, the PR was a better feeling than winning. So I wouldn't say there was any disappointment at all. I think I did everything I could do. I felt proud that I raced. It wasn't a matter of getting out kicked necessarily. I was closing gaps. So I was super thrilled with it.

So what are your takeaways from this one? Obviously you got the PR, you got a podium, you got a payday, your second payday in a few months if you count Austin, which has to feel pretty good.

It does.

So what are your lessons? What do you, as you think back now, having 10 days to think about it, what do you think about?

I think at this point I've raced enough marathons. I think my base is here to stay. I mean, I've been running very high mileage for, what, since 2009, 2010 now, years and years of it. I really trust that my really unorthodox methods are working for me in terms of keeping me strong at all times. So I knew I could run a decent marathon pretty much any time, whether I can properly train or not, to show up and run what I consider a really great race on almost no training was shocking. But what I think happened, I think I kind of hit a new level of fitness prepping for the trials last year. I had a proper training block with Steve, a solid three months of really, really good training. I think I was the fittest I'd ever been, but I didn't get the day at the LA trials to show it. But I think once you kind of hit a new level of fitness, it gets that much easier to get back to it. So it was really, really encouraging. My last PR, I ran under 240 almost three years ago. So it's been a while. It was a 22nd PR. And I think when I do get a chance to properly train again and have two, three, four months to really focus on it, I'm really excited about what I can do. I think there's still a lot of potential once I can get that period of time.

Yeah, there's more in the tank. So is that coming? I know you've got more trips coming and you've got a wedding coming at some point.

Yeah, there's a lot.

Dave, so when will you next race?

That's a great question. I don't know that I can race again this year. Obviously Mallory and I are taking on, trying to set the FKT on the Wonderland Trail in August. So that's gonna dominate everything from now till August, trying to be ready for a hundred mile run, which I'm really excited about. I think it's really important to take mental breaks, get away from the road, do something totally different, because that'll get me excited to be back on the road. My winters are still pretty open, although our year is gonna start much earlier next year with Rogue Expeditions. I think we have Patagonia mid-January. So that's gonna kinda cancel out a lot of racing opportunities, but April, May are still fairly open. I would like to go back to Vancouver. But you know, the window for the trials will open this fall. And so I'll need to settle on a race, get my qualifier. And I think the next goal is gonna be getting the A standard for my third trials, which is what I really wanna chase down. So that we are having more trips, we're getting more busy. We're also bringing in more help. And so I think my schedules actually might be a little more conducive to it. The winters though, I think will still be my prime time to have a block of time in place with a training group and a little bit of structure.

Awesome. Well, congrats again on your race. Very inspiring. Inspiring to me personally, because having been in the best fitness of my life last year at this time, it's encouraging to know that I can get back there if I do the work.

Yeah, you've already done the work, so you don't need quite so much the next time.

So as we close quickly, what trips are coming up that people can sign up for if they want to check out Rogue Expeditions?

So this fall, we've still got a handful of spots for all of our trips. We have one Slovenia only. We've got one that is Slovenia and Croatia. Those are both in September. And then into October, we've got two separate Morocco trips. We've got a short mountains and coasts. It's mostly trail running out in the mountains. That's a seven-day trip. And then we've got our full Sahara trip happening end of October. And then Kenya is October 1st to 10th.

And they can still sign up for all those?

They can still sign up for all of those. All the price increases are happening over the next month. So it's a good time to do it now. And then we just opened our spring 2018 trips on Monday and we've got signups happening for all of those. So best thing to do is check out that website.

rogueexpeditions.com. Awesome. Well, thanks Allison for joining again. Congrats. We will hopefully have you on more frequently. We'll talk to you soon. Now Steve joins me. We just finished the Allison interview.

Hello Chris. Hello podcast world.

The magic of editing brings Steve in at the close of that even though he was not here several hours ago.

I was 25 miles away.

When I recorded it. But Steve has listened to that interview now and I wanted to get his reaction as Allison's coach. I know you guys, Steve had a conversation yesterday, sort of your first one-on-one conversation post-race to recap things. So what's your reaction to Allison's result?

I guess I had three basic things, some three basic takeaways from it. Number one, I thought it was Allison's second best race that she's ever run since I've been coaching her. And a lot of people will kind of say, are you kidding me? And this was a PR, she ran an incredible race. The way the race played out, there was more drama than you would have expected. But I'm sorry, the Olympic trials to me are the real show. And so maybe a Boston or a New York, if she was second or something like that at a race. At that caliber, I might change my mind, but the Olympic trials, we set up for Allison to tee off a great race and perhaps even a career. We didn't know where she was at at that point. We didn't know if she was gonna continue to race at a really high competitive level post the trials. So we put a lot of time and energy and effort in that and she slayed that race. Yes, her time was not particularly fast, but she performed incredibly well in terrible weather conditions, of which normally Allison folds like a chair in hot conditions. So for me, I still consider that her Olympic trials is her best race, at least in the context of my coaching her. But this was really close. And I had a lot more confidence in Allison going into the race than she did. She mentioned a few key workouts. As she said, we did some 5K work, which is a little unusual with Allison. We don't do a lot of that because it costs her a lot. Physiologically, she breaks down. She has some other issues that happen when we do too much of that. But I wanted her to get a few of those kind of hurts. As I've said in this podcast before, and if I haven't, I've said it to many people before, the marathon and that 5K are really, really similar races in the way they hurt. Their duration is incredibly different. But if you take the race's scale and you scale them, they're really similar. And so she did a really key 5K workout where she went in and out 200s, which is one of our classic workouts. And she ran really fast. She ran faster than her PR for the 5K. And I was like, this is a key indicator for her. And she did it in the middle of nowhere, completely all by herself. Like in, I don't know, North Texas, somewhere in the middle of nowhere. So when she told me the results of that workout, I was like, oh man, we're gonna get a good result. Of course, at that time, I thought we were running a half. But we talked a little bit about that decision making process and I was thankful to be able to be a part of that. She is really kind and generous in the fact that even though my coaching role with her sort of only sits within a two to three month window, she's always checking in with me to see what my viewpoint is on things. And that is really, as a coach, that makes you feel really, really good. And so, you know, I was just like, what is Allison's career right now all about? I mean, I knew, I didn't know that she was really ready to go under 239, but I knew she was ready to run 240 or so. But I thought, you know, what's this all about? It's about making money. She's a professional now. And, you know, people may scoff at that. But Allison Macsas, if you'd asked her 10 years ago, if she was gonna be a professional athlete who could generate revenue through her running, she'd have told you, she would have laughed at you. She would have said, there's no way.

$4, 000 in two months.

I mean, yeah, it's not a ton of money, but it's worth doing. And, you know, I think it's just a testament to her. And so she switched. I also think she has, she does have a tendency to, as much as she was nervous about the marathon, it's her comfortable place. So even on a bad day, the kind of pain she goes through in the marathon is much more her cup of tea than the pain she goes through in even a half marathon. But I think that she made the right decision. So my first takeaway was, second best race, my next takeaway was, as Allison indicated, maybe a little more humbly than she should have. That was next level shit. She's on another level. And she proved it to herself, which I don't think she had proved before. I had already known it because of the stuff that I'd been seeing from her on her break times away. When she came back, what was going on, I was like, this girl's on another level. And we do this podcast talking about sound, training techniques and the way to progress and how to get better. And Allison basically takes her entire ideas and snaps them over her knee and says, you don't have to have a plan. Which is not really true. If you look at our fundamental principles, she's following a lot of those fundamental principles, but she's certainly not going through a really concrete, planned out method. And I think for Allison, that is so crucially key. And the kind of fitness that she develops is what we talked about a couple weeks ago, Chris, resilience. And Allison did not always believe herself to be a resilient person. And now she is confident that she can suffer with anybody. She may not be as fast as a Shalane Flanagan or a Amy Craig, but she knows that those women or any other man for that matter, even Ilya Kipchoki, well, maybe we'll keep him out of it, but even Gaylen Rupp won't hurt better than Allison will hurt and will not be able to respond better than Allison respond. That's a huge, that's an incredible confidence boost. So I think that is true now. And you could hear in her voice in that interview, I heard it, I think you probably heard it. I definitely heard it yesterday when we had a post-op after the race. So it's interesting to see how her unorthodox training techniques following pretty sound principles, but still unorthodox has built the resilience in her that is crucial and key. And finally, most importantly, the very end of it all is just that if you stay with it, if you stay committed and consistent, magic will happen. And Allison is a key indicator of that. People want to stop things so early if they don't see excellence, or if they don't see some level of facility or a level of success that bears out the time and energy they put into it. Allison's about process, not results. Results, when they come, are gratifying. You're super thankful for them, and you'll even take that check and put it in the bank account. But at the end of the day, Allison is doing this for another ulterior reason altogether, which is it's a part of her process. It's part of who she is. And when that happens, and you combine that with next level training, which is where she's at, was my first point, a resilience that is much higher than we've ever seen for her, and a belief in that resilience, and you combine that with a long-term vision and practice, now she's looking at the 2020 Olympic trials to perhaps have a best day ever. When four years ago, three years ago, we were saying maybe that was gonna be her last day. So folks, keep your eyes on the prize. If you believe in this as a path with heart, if you think that running is something you wanna be good at, this is the one sport. It's like shooting free throws. You don't have to be seven foot two to be a great free throw shooter. And your team might need you shooting free throws. Practice will do it. Keep practicing and practicing. In our sport, you don't have to be seven foot two. You don't have to be anything. You just have to keep being consistent. Our sport rewards that kind of thing. And Allison is a key example of that, in my opinion.

Consistency is king. Her story also, specifically around this race, but also around other races she's had, shows you that you don't have to have a perfect build up to have a good race. Everybody often seeks that perfect build or that perfectly set up situation where they're going to go in PR. And yeah, we believe in command performances, of course, but there are times when you don't have a perfect build up and you can go out and still slay the dragon if you approach it the right way mentally and that's what happened.

I actually would argue that Allison didn't approach it mentally correctly in a lot of ways, at least from the time the gun went off to the 30K point. But beforehand, she heard me repeatedly. We had a short conversation. And another thing, Allison didn't talk about this, but Chris and I know, she was not in the most emotionally stable state when she went into this. And we're not gonna go into all the challenges that Allison had, but she runs a business and she's crucial in the way that business functions. And she went through a lot of choppy water going into this race that was not ideal in any way. But right before she left, I said to her, you are ready for something special because I saw in that 5K workout that you did, that you're as fit or fitter than I've ever seen you before. Don't be too conservative. Take a risk. We had a different plan for that race, but you know, the gun went off, those girls went off like Jack Rabbits, and Allison, you know, that's another thing Allison does. She just adjusts. But she wasn't afraid to be aggressive. And I think that was really key. Even though she was questioning on the starting line, wishing she was running the half, she said, I'm gonna be aggressive. I'm not afraid to be aggressive. Even this guy, Talon, I mean, Allison two years ago, some old man told her that she was gonna run 236 pace, she would have put the brakes on immediately. And she didn't do that. She just rolled with it because she said, I'm gonna be aggressive. So kudos, I tip my hat to her. She is just an amazing athlete to coach. Although our coaching relationship is a little unorthodox, it brings meaning to me in ways that I can't even explain to people.

And she's someone to root for, for sure. All right, so transitioning to a couple other quick things before we dive into our coach athlete conversation. We gotta talk collegiate track and field. We haven't talked about it. It's been happening. The season has been building. We haven't talked about it because it's a sort of a can of worms that we present it to open with other things happening, but we've gotta talk about it now, especially as conference championships just happened this past weekend. A couple of highlights that we wanted to mention that we wanted to talk about upcoming NCAA regionals, which are happening here in Austin the weekend after this one publishes. First result that we gotta mention is from Central Texas high school athlete went to Rouse High School, Maddie Borman. She actually worked for us as an employee on the sales floor in our Cedar Park location. Trained at Rouse, also was a soccer player competitively in the area. She was a freshman in high school when she won the state cross country championship. So as one who's always shown a lot of potential, but since that point kind of had some ups and downs through her high school career, went to train at the University of Colorado with the great Mark Wettboer and Heather Burroughs. She's a very important cog in that wheel. And she had a breakthrough performance at the Pac-12 conference championships, winning the steeplechase in a time of 10.06, which was a PR for her, but also a pretty darn impressive result for a freshman in college. And doing it at the Pac-12 is arguably the most competitive conference meet out there, is pretty impressive. I've got to also say I watched the race this morning. She came into the final hurdle in third, came over that, and then passed the two in front of her, including her own teammate, to win that race. So she finished really strong with a nice closing kick. And it's clear that those two freshmen, her and her teammate who finished second, are anointed to be the next Shalaya Kip, Jenny Simpson, Emma Coburn at the University of Colorado with a long history of Steele Jace champions. So talk about Maddie's result quickly.

Well, Maddie, I've been following Maddie's career since she was in sixth or seventh grade. Her coach at Rouse High School, Kelly Thompson, I recruited some athletes when he, that he, I recruited some athletes to go to the University of Texas in the years that I coached there. And he, Maddie went through a lot of challenges in her high school career. She was a stellar, when I say stellar, I mean an extremely good soccer player. And she, but she, and she didn't really like running. She didn't like the solo aspect of running. I remember Kelly and I having multiple conversations when I was a coach at Texas about how he, what he could do. And I was like, you can do anything, buddy. You just gotta let it flow and you gotta just keep asking her the question. What do you want? What do you want? What do you want? And how bad do you want it? You know, they worked really hard to get to the University of Colorado. Colorado definitely played hard to get with Maddie. I know that because I had a little piece in that process. But, I mean, Maddie's a true freshman. To run 10.06, I coached the steeplechase for many, many years, and I was a steeplechaser myself. 10.06 in your freshman year to win the PAC-12 Conference Championship, folks, that is an amazing result. And for Colorado to have two true freshmen, I mean, these are true freshmen. They didn't go through a full year and a half, two year process to get prepared to do that. Maybe they went through a semester, right? They probably had, I don't know that they ran cross, but they definitely, you know, they were ready for this day. And as Mark and Heather do, they have their athletes ready for command performances. That is, and Maddie is a competitor. She's super talented. You will definitely be hearing more from Maddie. In fact, I would not be surprised if you hear more from Maddie this year. At 10.06, that's not too far away from being in the mix with a K to go. And as you said, watching that video, mean blood in the water. When there's blood in the water, she was a shark.

And it was a championship race. So the time was a championship time. I mean, you gotta have slower times as people are playing the games with the paces. If that was a time trial, who knows what she could do? I mean, I think this definitely puts her in the conversation for NCAAs, potentially even US champs, if they wanna go there with her. I know sometimes that's a question for development.

She'll probably junior this year because there's a lot more to benefit from that. She'll probably go juniors this year. But the thing is that she's showing what people knew about Maddie, but maybe she didn't know about herself. So we're gonna go into some of this conversation a little later in our other topic about what people believe in themselves as opposed to what they don't. But I think that Maddie had a heart to go to Colorado and to go to the best place. And as a college athlete who, in my high school senior year, I had some really bad races and some really good races, I went where I thought I could get better. And that decision is always a great decision. If you have a chance to train with people who are better than you, and to be in an environment where great results happen, whether at the collegiate level or if you're running as an adult, take that opportunity because there's something about being around an esprit de corps that is championship or command performance focused. It will be a game changer for your racing.

And for her, she's in a lineage now that's huge with those other athletes I mentioned that came before her in the steeplechase at Colorado, so it'll be exciting to see her career play out. We're rooting for you, Maddie, here from Austin, Texas. We also have to mention, speaking of Austin, the University of Texas was competing at the Big 12 Championships. The men came out with the win.

Again, I think it's the third.

Third year in a row.

Three feet.

And then the women got second by a fairly narrow margin. It came down to the last two events. They lost by four and a half points, which isn't many when it comes to all of those events on the track. So big results from Texas. You coached there only, what, a few short years ago. What are your reactions on that?

Couple things. Congratulations to Mario Satana, the head coach. Some people may know or don't know that he has had a very tough last six or 12 months. And to see him come back, get the ship righted, focus and get the intent where it needed to be, and to have his staff rally back behind him and to get the job done on the men's side, amazing. I'm sure he's extremely disappointed to not get both the wins. It was in their hands. In fact, unfortunately for Texas, I think the distance runners didn't get it done that day. The last two races, their star in Sandy Rains just had a bad meet. She had a great race a couple weeks before in Stanford, and she just didn't have the meet that she needed to have to get the points that they needed. And that's no, one of the things I want to tell people, you can't put a loss on one person or even one event, but I'm sure that that didn't help, and especially when you see the points that got piled up in the sprints. I mean, what they're doing in the sprints right now, and I was coaching there at the University of Texas with the Intimidable Bev Kearney, who got it done. I think they're getting more done now than they ever have before. The kind of domination that's going on in a sprint-based conference that Texas is putting on, impressive. That was an incredibly impressive result from the four by one all the way to the 400 and into the four by fours from the University of Texas, especially on the women's side. But you know what? The men don't get any credit in the sprints, and Zach Galovac, who is at Texas Tech for a long time, he's getting the job done for them on the men's side with the sprints. But the women's sprinters at the University of Texas again proved to be just unbelievable.

Yeah, and if you're a Longhorn, we'll talk about this and more in just a second. As I mentioned, Regionals is coming up at Texas. We'll actually be on campus there from May 25th through 27th, so that's the weekend after this thing posts, so go check it out as a fan, because it's fun to be around that weekend anyway. I like running around that area because you see all the athletes warming up and you kind of get to feel the energy of the event.

Town Lake is crazy that weekend.

Yeah, some crazy talent on Town Lake doing cool down jogs and warm ups and things like that. But we'll get to that Regional conversation in a second. I also wanted to mention, before we get to that Texas A&M, the decathlete there, Lyndon Victor, set the collegiate record for the decathlon, took Trey Hardy, former Longhorns record, also former World Champions record, to now take that record to Texas A&M and the decathlon. And he's proven that he's the heir apparent to Trey and Ash Neaton, who's retiring or just retired this year. So it's good to see that the US has another up and coming decathlon athlete who will be competing with the best of the world soon enough.

Yeah, you know, I bleed burnt orange. There's no doubt about that. And I have all my life made Aggie jokes and I will continue to make Aggie jokes. But I have a huge and immense respect for the program that Pat Henry's put together over there at the university, at Texas A&M University. The Aggies, from top to bottom, their coaching staff is par excellence. They're amazing. And to see the level of success that they're having. If you think about the people that left that program in the last year, I mean, the number one 800 meter runner in the country soon, in my opinion, to be the world. I mean, there's people who will argue with that, but I mean, Donovan Brasier in his freshman year runs 145. And I mean, they're just doing amazing things over there. And this though, I don't think people, the Catalan used to be the greatest sport on earth. Historically, in the late 1800s into the 1900s, we had amazing success all the way to 1976 with Bruce slash Caitlyn Jenner. And into the last few years that we've had with Trey Hardy here in Central Texas and nationally and internationally, and obviously the greatest decathlete at this point in time, in my opinion, Ashton Eaton, who was unbelievable. This guy's that level already. And decathletes get better with age, man. They get better as they go along. So this is a guy to watch, man. And I hope that people don't just hear with our excitement about all track and field that we're just distance fans. We are mostly distance fans, because we do it. But we really understand what other things are going on in the sport, especially the decathlon, which is just a real... and the women's heptathlon, which are really cool events.

And you have to if you're going to be a true fan, in my opinion. I wasn't going to talk about it, but because you mentioned that, I've got to mention, we also have to be excited about Noah Lyle, who ran sub-20, only the fourth teenager in history to go under 20 seconds. 19 years old, ran 19.9 in Shanghai Diamond League Meet. He's a guy to watch, especially as Bolt retires, as the potential heir apparent in the 200. So, yes, we are total fans, not just distance fans, but that was a tangent I had to cover because you mentioned it. So, impressive. It would be interesting to see, going back to Victor, his point total would have been fifth at Rio. So he's already, and that's without really being pushed. So he's already there, and this is at a conference championship. So he's already there, at least relative to the best in the world. So it would be interesting to see how he progresses. Getting back to the regional discussion, as I mentioned.

Wait a second, before you go there, we're not going to get a chance to cover this if we don't cover it now. I just want to tip my hat to the online resource of letsrun.com. Anybody who is interested in the things that Chris and I are talking about from a fan-based perspective, that's a great place to go. Don't go to the forum right off the bat. It's a little intimidating. But there's a lot of interesting stuff there. But go just to the front page once a week or once every two weeks, or just go to the one link they have almost every... I can't remember which day of the week it is, but they'll do a week in review each week, and they'll tap down all the major things that just happen in track and field from the perspective of it's distance-focused mostly, but they've got a huge appreciation for the throwers and the jumpers and the decathletes and everything. That's Weldon and Robert Johnson, who are Dallasites, who are friends of John Shrupp, who was just on our show. They're good buddies. They've been coached by the same coach, the great John Kellogg, who's another guy we should talk about or two at some point in time. But anyway, Let's Run, I just wanted to hit my hat to those of you who think you might want to be track fans and you're hearing Chris and I talk about it, but you're a little intimidated about where to start. Go to Let's Run. It's a little overwhelming. It's a little bit like a 1990s web page with not a whole lot of fanciness, but it's great insight, great intel, and pretty thoughtful stuff. And then if you want to dive down into the forum, good luck with that. But I have spent days in depths there. But one of the guys who we give a little shit to, but we also say he's one of the great coaches of all time, is Renato Canova. He posts on that forum consistently. If you call him out, he will post. He's posted the workouts that athletes have done in the most recent extreme races. The guy at Doha who ran 3, 000 meters, who we're going to be talking about soon in terms of his 5K, the guy who could maybe knock down Mo Farah, he outlined his key workouts from the last six weeks on a forum. So if you're into this shit and you're really excited about it, consider going there. Anyway, sorry, that was an aside, but I just needed to say this.

letsrun.com, definite shout out there. I go there mostly daily.

Yeah, so do I.

To get all of this information and more. So to wrap quickly, as I mentioned, regionals, West regionals, is coming to Austin this coming weekend after this post, which is the preliminary round before NCAAs, the final championships for collegiate athletes. That format has changed, especially over the last few years. They used to have a descending order list where everybody was ranked by time or point total or distance, and then the top X would go to NCAAs in a certain event. Now they have this regional concept that's iterated a bit. Explain to people what they're watching as it relates to regionals and how it works in sort of the layman's Cliff Notes version.

Sure, I'll try to do this as quick as possible. When I ran collegiately, they took the top 24 times in a descending order list. So if you ran in the 800, if you ran 147.8 and you were 25th on the list, you didn't go to the NCAA Championships. If you ran one, 21, whatever the number I just said, a half a quarter of a second faster, then you went to the National Championships. It was a really hard line. And many people still think that that's the most fair and reasonable way to do it. But the NCAA has different ideas. In the NCAA, in the late 90s, early aughts, they just decided that the sport, they just put pressure on the US Track and Field Coaches Association, which is sort of the collegiate coaches' think tank, that they put pressure on them to change the format to qualify for the NCAA Championships, because they really value head-to-head competition. And this comes from, first of all, the NCAA Basketball Tournament. But those of you who are not really fans of Track and Field, you'll understand the NCAA Basketball Tournament, but you'll also see how this has significantly changed in the NCAA's vision of this in the way that they have selected with the NCAA Football Championship, where they have decided they needed to have more than just one game decided by a computer. They wanted and valued head-to-head competition. So Track and Field got pushed down that direction to say, you must give us head-to-head competition. I don't know what the what for, where for, or how they were going to put the collegiate coaches' arms behind their backs to make it do it, but they did it. They created initially a regional system, which is what you called it, which was four regions, and then those four athletes from those four regions would compete head-to-head in their events, and they would take basically six from each of those four regions to get the same 24 people to go to the national championship. Then they realized that the regions weren't very paired very well, and they were not really fair the way that they had gotten distributed, because they were doing it regionally, which is not the way that Powerhouse, that way that these, then the Southeast Conference or anybody in the Southeast, it was way too competitive for the sprinters to get there, because there's not a whole lot of sprinters in the Pacific Northwest, and there's not a lot of sprinters in the Northeast. There are some, but not as many. And so they were not these balances of power that they tried to get. So then they decided to go to a two-region system, and then they decided to just get rid of the region altogether, and they decided that this is not a region. This is the NCAA championship preliminary round. So all these athletes who have run these times, and I can't remember what it is, but I guess 48 athletes in each event are on a descending order list. So they still got the descending order list, which let's just leave that Pandora's box alone. But they've still got a descending order list, but now they've got to compete to get a spot on the starting line of the first preliminary of the finals of the NCAA championship. So I don't know if I made it more confusing or less confusing, but the basic thing here is head-to-head competition is valued. There's two arguments here. I'm a fan of this idea conceptually, because as an athlete, my coach always got me ready for command performances. And there were teams all over the country who would get their athletes ready for the fastest race of the year. So now that would be at the Stanford invite or the Cardinal invite. And you could run in a really perfect weather conditions and get everything lined up against just the right competition and time trial your way to getting a starting spot at the NCAA championship. And I can see the problem with that, because that would value someone who's really fit at the wrong time of the year for when the national championship should be set up. And we were seeing results where a quarter of the field after the gun went off at the NCAA championships mailed it in because they weren't fit enough to actually compete or they'd gotten hurt or some other thing happened. And they went because they got per diem and they went because their coaches wanted to say they got athletes to the NCAA championship, but they weren't ready to compete. And so as a competitor who was always ready for a command performance and with a coach who always got us ready for that, it was frustrating. Many years I was ready to go to the NCAA championships, but I hadn't run the time fast enough because I didn't go to the right meet or in the right place to get it done, and I couldn't compete my way into it. So that's really cool that they've done that. But the problem is that it's just, in some events, it's just not good. The pole vault has got so many variables that could happen. We want the best pole vaulters at the finals of the pole vault. The decathlon. Now, the decathlon is not subject to the regional system or the preliminary system. They are still a descending order list because that event is too hard to do over and over again. They've talked about moving the 10, 000 meters out of it because it's also difficult to do that. And believe me, those guys who are in the western preliminary region coming to the city of Austin, Texas at the end of May and running a race in 95-degree temperatures, it is literally going to be a farce. And so people who want to watch it, you're going to watch it and you're going to wonder, what the heck is going on here? This is not really head-to-head competition. Well, the top 20 guys are going to be going after it ferociously. They'll be tearing each other's heads off. But the guys in the back is going to be so hot, they're going to mail it in and they're just going to say whatever. And it's going to seem not like their first round. So it's just a lot of questions going on about what all this process is. I think currently it's almost better to go back to a descending order list, but my heart says I love to watch competition. So I don't know if I made it confusing or not confusing.

Well, just to clarify this for me, so West Regionals, men's 10K, there's going to be 24 athletes towing the line.

12 will go.

12 of those will go. The top 12. The top 12. The top 12 finishers.

Now, there's a weird thing, so if they have 5K, this is really crazy. And the 5K, because they're calling it the preliminary round, I had an athlete that this happened to, they're going to do two heats, and they're going to take six and six, or five and five with two fastest times, which is how preliminary rounds go. You know this, Chris, but basically the way that preliminary happens is they take the first five or the first set number that come across the finish line, and then they take the next fastest times because they don't want it to just be competitive because some heats are way faster and some heats are slower. There's a lot of interesting intrigue in all of that, but they are running this meat as a preliminary round, which really confuses the fan base. So fans, if you're coming to Austin, if you're in Austin and you're going to watch this meet, go and watch it. But watch it for the athlete performances, not for what the subtext of what you think athletic competition is from a team perspective. There's no team results in this thing. They're not going to score it. They're not going to determine who the number one team is. They're just going to use it as the first round for the next championship. One good thing for all the track fans that are in the Central Texas is, y'all get to watch the best in the world. Come out and watch. Come out and watch Oregon and Stanford and Texas and UCLA and Arizona and all these amazing programs. Texas A&M. Watch these athletes compete live in the Flash. And it's super, super cool. It's really amazing. It's just a weird format and one that doesn't make a whole lot of sense to people. But just suffice it to say really quickly and shortly, it's the first round. These people all earned the right to get there, but they're going to have to earn the right to go to Eugene, Oregon, which is now pretty much in perpetuity, which is bullshit, by the way. I'm not going to go to another conversation. But they always have the NCAA Championship. They always have the US Championships. They always have the Olympic Championships. I'll leave that alone. But they're going to go to Track Town USA and compete for what will be and always is, in my opinion, the greatest track and field meet of the year is the NCAA Championships every single year. If you want a little taste of it and you're in Central Texas, go watch the preliminary round.

Check it out in Austin. Well, I think just to summarize, it's the prelim round. You got to think of it that way. It's not a meet in and of itself. It's a prelim round to get people to the next round, just as if that prelim round were happening in the same place.

Correct.

As the final would. So hopefully people are less confused, more informed. Hopefully.

I'm not sure.

Who knows? We're in the business of probably confusing more than helping. But that wraps up our intro. Hopefully not with our next topic. That wraps up our intro, which went long, but we're going to keep rolling. And we're talking about the coach-athlete relationship. We're going to start this just going straight into it. We're going to have as the foundation for this conversation a one-on-one coach-athlete conversation, which is the one between you and I. Steve's my coach. I'm his athlete. We're also co-hosts on the show. We're due for a one-on-one conversation to talk about my training, so we thought, why not just do it live? We haven't scripted this. We haven't planned it. We haven't talked about any of these elements before this moment.

Are we going to promise not to cut and paste?

Well, I never do.

Yes, sure, you don't. We're too busy to do that. What, are we going to offend somebody?

So basically, we're going to show you the raw, the raw one-on-one that we would have as an example of a coach-athlete conversation, and we're going to wrap that up with some takeaways that can apply more broadly. Hopefully, you'll also learn a little bit about us as a part of this conversation. So we'll see, we'll let you kind of peek in to an athlete conversation with me as the guinea pig.

Just one quick caveat. I'm an unconventional coach. I don't think we've said these things out loud. I'm an unconventional coach. I tell my athletes this in the one-on-ones when I do with them. I'm an intuitive coach. I understand the basic science, but I'm not researching the latest cutting edge science. And so a lot of what you guys are going to hear is not something you should take as a de facto version of what a coach athlete conversation would have. At Rogue, we have many coaches, Chris is one, who has individual one-on-one conversations doing exactly the same process that we're doing, but Chris is going to bring to it his analytical and still intuitive, because you are super intuitive, but you bring a much more analytical angle to it, and you just come at it from a different place. So I want to make sure it's said, this is not a cult of personality, number one. Number two, I'm not doing it the right way. I'm just doing it my way. So please, as you listen to this, take that as a grain of salt when you meet with your coach, or if you don't meet with your coach, you should fucking demand to meet with your coach and make sure that you're having these kinds of conversations with them. Even if you don't, I have them with my athletes about twice a year. And so that's about the right amount of time to have. But it's important to just have them. Don't use this as the template for everything. Use this more as, this is how one athlete and one coach go about that process.

That's a good point. Steve's not going to bring up my workout history or even my race history and say, well, you did this, so we're going to do that. Which is fine. I've accepted your style. So it's okay with me. But you make a good point that this is not a template we're trying to lay out for people. And also, before we dive into it specifically, I did want to give people some context on me as a runner. I've talked about it some. But just to give people some history, I started running in 2000. So 17 years ago as a senior in college, essentially, I had finished playing soccer and needed a way to stay in shape. So I started running, did a 10K on the road with a friend of mine who had run some cross country in high school and said, hey, you should come out and run with me. Did that 10K in, I don't know, something like 42 minutes and was hooked.

It was pretty fast for a first. You were a soccer player.

I was a soccer player. I had 15 years of aerobic development as a soccer player.

15 years of 45-minute hard legs.

And so, you know, I thought, well, this is kind of cool. I'm decent at it already. And I was hooked on the competitive element of it as a way to at least compete with myself and continue the competitive juices I had had playing soccer in a team environment. So that began my running career. I had a really fairly quick progression with one hiccup, had a stress fracture in training for my first marathon, which was my next race. I went from 10K to marathon and got stress fractured. I'm not sure I had some result of that. But after working through that, got, you know, had a decent first marathon and ultimately a fairly rapid progression for my first four years as a runner. Went from a 320-ish first marathon to a 246 in about four years. So when I was 24, that's what I ran in Austin. Then life happened, grad school happened, kids happened, work happened. Still continued in the sport, but stopped progressing. I had also got to a point where I plateaued as a runner because I was trying to do too much all the time and too fast all the time. So really during that plateau, kind of dove into training principles on my own. Became a coach, started reading up on all this stuff, read about Arthur Lidier and all these things. Fast forward about five years from that point after having sort of a five-year plateau, came to Rogue, got involved here, started training with Team Rogue when you were the coach originally before John stepped in for a bit, and kind of continued my journey again, but had some catching up to do. It took me from that point three and a half years till my next marathon PR, and I've talked about it on this show where I kind of had this realization that my fastest times could still be ahead of me if I just did a few things that I needed to do, and so I did that. And so I've had a marathon PR three years ago, half marathon PR two years ago, and various other PRs, 10K distance. I think the only distance I haven't PR'd in is the 5K because I haven't raced it since we've met. So that was all that was happening. Last year, I was building up to have a command performance at the Boston Marathon, was ready to do that, showed up on race day, thought that that was what's going to happen. It was warm, but that didn't matter for me that day because I ended up having some pain in my heel that started early in that race that progressed to a stress fracture. In the midst of the race, I had to walk the last four miles and had a personal worst marathon that day. And that started the last year for me, which has kind of been a start-stop where I've had some injury issues, whereas normally I had been fairly healthy after that initial stress fracture. So I've had some injury issues and then an elbow fracture nine weeks ago that has disrupted my training. And so I'm kind of at a point now where I'm restarting again after some hiccups in the last year and trying to get back to that place. So it's a good time to have this conversation. Hopefully that history wasn't too boring, but it gives you some context. And I want to start from the beginning, which is getting back to purpose, which we've talked about many times on this in our mental training episode, which is why am I doing this? Why are you here?

Why are you meeting with me at this point, sitting across the table from me, telling me that you think you have the best still ahead of you? Why do you think that, number one? And number two, why the hell are you doing this? So can you answer those questions?

Yes, I'll start with why am I doing this. And I'm curious to get your perspectives on this, because we've talked about it some, but never directly. And so this will be really our first time to have this conversation as a coach athlete. So everyone's hearing this for the first time, and we have no idea where this is going to go. But I think I do it for two reasons. One of the reasons is why I started in the beginning, which is that I'm a competitive person, I'm a competitor, and running provides for me an outlet to compete, particularly with myself. So for me, the running journey, half of it now is about competing with myself to be a faster version of myself and to, as a result of that journey, uncover things about myself that I wouldn't find out otherwise. And so that's a big part of it. The second part of the equation, which at times I think has changed and evolved for me, but right now I think this is a big part of it for me, which is that I want to do it to show others what's possible. I coach a bunch of athletes. I've got many, many on my roster right now that all look to me and have seen my struggles over the last year, and I've shared all of that openly with them. They've also seen some of my successes. Those have trained with me longer. And right now, I want to prove to them that you can have these bumps in the road and lots of them, you know, in succession. You can have a year like I've had and bounce back and still come through all of that and have your fastest results on the other side of it. And so I want to do it to show them what's possible in themselves for all those of my athletes that struggle, because we all do it various times, struggle with ups and downs and injuries and times when we have to focus on other things and can't focus on training or whatever it may be. So for me right now, I think it's about those two things. There are other reasons I do it. Like I really like the team aspect of Team Rogue and the collegiality of that and competing with those people I train with on Tuesdays and Thursdays and just being with them and training with them on Tuesdays and Thursdays is a big part of why I run generally. But in terms of being my fastest self, those first two things are the reason why I do it.

Cool. So whenever we talk about statement of purpose, I usually ask my athletes to write it out for me because when I have the ability to digest it, they have the ability to really think about it as sort of a... I'm going to shout it out from the rooftops if you listen to that first podcast where we discussed this particular topic. But you've obviously spent a lot of time thinking about this because you're not somebody who just fucking pulls shit out of your ass like me. So, I mean, both of those two are really meaningful and worthwhile statements of purpose. But there's some questions I need to... I got to sort of test the underside of the boat to see if it'll hold water. And so two pokes there are... One is this idea of competing with yourself, it means that there's usually, when you're in competition with other people, they are the moving target. So they're the target that you're shooting for and that you're seeing. This challenge with competing with yourself or competing against your best self or trying to run a beautiful race, like we say sometimes. Those are great speech topics, right? Because nobody pokes a hole in your idea because you're going to walk away and they're going to clap and you're going to move on, right? But what does that really mean? Because I think that in order for that to be a statement of purpose, to be something really strong, can you give us an example, or maybe not an example because that might not be appropriate, but just maybe delve in a little bit more about some kind of specifics for you personally, where you know that you will have been wrestling with the angel, to use the biblical analogy I love to use, because that's what you're saying here. I love this as a statement of purpose because it's what we do as human beings, right? Both of these two statements of purpose are Chris being the best human he can be. But what does it mean for you to wrestle with the angel? Because the angel is your version of God or a god in you, right? So what does that mean, you competing against yourself? Because if you said you wanted to beat Brian Morton, well, we'd line that shit up and try to figure out how to do it. Because I ain't scared of nobody. But I want to know what it means to compete with yourself. Because now as your coach, how do I use this? Because as a coach, what I do, this is kind of interesting to do this, because as a coach, what I do with my athletes is say, is my athlete full of shit later on? I'm able to push Chris. When he's having a bad day, he's having a great day. When he's having his worst day, I can use it to lift him up. When he's on his greatest day, I can use it to pull him down. Because neither our greatest days or our worst days are our real days. And that is not what happens in marathoning. Ask Allison. We just talked about 35k of shit sandwiches and 7k of I can't believe this just happened. So the question is, what does it mean? How do you really look at it in a way that I'll be able to use as your coach to help you?

So I'll start by giving you an example. When I was 34, running Bryan College Station, that was almost...

That was our first cycle together, correct?

Well, after you coming back.

I don't even remember the first time I coached you. I'm not even sure.

That's such a shame.

That's just a damning indictment to where I was at that time in my career. But anyway.

But I was 34. I was competing with my 24-year-old self.

Ah, yeah.

And in that cycle and in that race, I thought about that. And now that I'm three years older, 37, gonna be 38 in July, I am more aware of my mortality than ever. And my body is changing as I age. And so, there's something about beating your younger self as you age that's powerful and empowering. Because I was definitely stronger, probably faster in terms of raw speed when I was 24. But when I was 34, I was wilier. Not stronger physically maybe, but aerobically stronger. And now I think I'm both of those things and more. So it's wrapped up in this idea of facing my own mortality and realizing that if I can beat my younger self, that's hugely empowering.

So just to get to brass tacks, that means tell us exactly the time that you need to run that is your former best self.

Well, I was going to get to goals in a bit.

But we're going to go there. But this is a statement of purpose, because now what you've done...

So when I was 34, I ran 245, 40X. I don't know the exact PR. I'm analytical, but not that OCD. But I don't want to beat that. To me, beating that would be cool, but I don't want to beat that.

You know you already did.

I can beat that.

You know you already did in our prep for Boston. You just get the chance to show it.

And honestly, I did it in Martian as well on a hot day. I ran 247, but that was easily worth more on a 73 day. So I know I can beat that. But ultimately, I want to run 240. I've told you before, my lifetime goal that I set arbitrarily when I was in the 20s, it still means something. I want to run 240. Because that's a goal to me. It's like, if you ask me, say, hey, Chris, can you run 243? I'd say, yeah, I think I can run 243. Hey, Chris, can you run 242? I'd be like, yeah, I think I can run 242. Chris, can you run 241? Yeah, I think I can run 241. If you ask me if I can run under 240, I think I can do it, but I don't know. That's the point where it starts to get... I don't know. And so I know that kind of gets me into that realm of the impossible a little bit. But I think it's possible, but that's what starts to make my sphincter pucker, as you say. And so I want to run there. Now, that's not necessarily my next marathon, because there might be a stepwise in between. But I want to run 240 for the marathon.

239x.

Just to clarify.

So I want to then ask you to consider refining your statement of purpose. Because you really aren't trying to beat your former self you feel like you already have. What you're doing is you're trying to be the best you can be, or, you know, to sort of... I saw this... I'm embarrassed to say this. I went and saw with my brother and his daughter, my niece, and Ruth, my life partner, we went and saw Guardians of the Universe Part 2 or whatever it is. I didn't see Part 1. I was just going with my niece to go watch it. I cried eight times in that movie. It killed me, man. It killed me because they're being superheroes. And I had just given that... You know, I talked about this about Boston. You're asking yourself to be a hero. Like, you want to... And what does that mean in our current society? It's not Superman coming out of a fucking... out of the phone booth anymore. It's something else. And so let's re-clarify... Not today, but let's think about clarifying that. Because I think that what you're saying is, yes, that's how you got to this point about what your statement of purpose is. But what your real statement of purpose is sort of is encapsulated in the second part, which is you want to be a role model. You want to be the anti-Barkley, right? You want... Charles Barkley is famous, at least in our era, of saying he was not a role model. And what you're saying is you want to be a role model, which means that you're even a role model to yourself. And you said this in a really interesting way about Allison. You said or heard you say it in that interview with her. She's like, she inspired you. Why? Because she ran again under 239, and you run with her on a consistent basis. You know she's not that much better than you. She is doing more volume than you are, and she has way more successes than you have. But you know there's days where you've had her on the ropes or you've been right with her, and she at least can draw you to the thing that you want to do. And so you know what it means to be a hero. Role model is such a cheesy word, and hero is such a cheesy word. I don't know the right word for it. That's something we're working through in this podcast, is really what does it mean to be that champ, like the best person you can be, the best runner you can be, as an indicator to your athletes, as you said, to your teammates, because this breed of core of a team is important to you, to yourself, because that's crucial and key. I know we're talking meta stuff here. It kind of sounds a little bit like we're in a therapy session, but this is what this statement of purpose is. And the reason I'm not poking holes in Chris as a human being, I'm saying to him, let's get underneath the bottom and the murky deep of what this float boat that we all see above water, but underneath it is the real guts of it, and the real guts of it are you want to prove that you're capable and able to be, and that's what Carl Jung's entire idea of the archetypal viewpoint is. The entire idea of Western symbology is around this idea of being the best you you can be and using these models to help you get there. So, damn straight, double pump slam dunk on statement of purpose.

I like it.

But refine it a little bit, I think, just to take that part of your old self out because you're already there, in my opinion. And I think it's going to be... I'm going to have to redo this in a year when you kill it, and we got to go on to the next goal. I don't want to have to do that then. I want to do it now. It's like, okay, what is that? And let's go after it. So the next part, you're always the leader in these things. I'm going to lead with the next part, which is we already got there, right? What's your BHAG? And we have this term we use here. It's used perennially around the world about big, hairy, audacious goal, the thing that makes you a sphincter pucker, the big, big thing, preferably is long down the line, and you just stated it. So part of your statement of purpose, which happens with these things frequently, we put them as separate pieces just in case the statement of purpose, some athletes I've coached, their statement of purpose has a lot to do with their faith. There's a couple key athletes that I've worked with who they wanted to be a role model in the same way that you stated, but it had a lot to do with their Christian purpose and who they were as they were as a representative of the kind of man or woman that is representative of that. So that allows me to then use and push the levers I need to, but it has nothing to do with their goal. Whereas yours was sort of kind of a nice mix of that. So what is your big, your big hairy audacious goal at this point in time is 239X. Right?

Yes.

Correct?

Absolutely.

Cool. So what will it take?

So with that very pregnant question, what will it take? We're going to stop this episode, episode 23. We're going to pick this up in episode 24, continuing the discussion between Steve and I on my goals and the coach athlete relationship. We'll talk about how I can now begin achieving that goal as Steve will walk me through it. And then we'll wrap it up with some summary tips on the coach athlete relationship and how to improve your coach athlete relationship. Thanks as always for listening. Again, this is episode 23. Check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Instagram, Twitter, and Facebook at Rogue Running. We'll talk to you soon.