Hey, everybody, welcome to episode 376 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung, coming to you from Austin, Texas. Excited about this May 2nd day, excited to release this episode. We're going to do another Q&A episode. And I've got just a little bit of a tip for prepping for fall races here at the beginning. And then we're going to get into some Q&A from your emails. So we'll get to that in just a second. Before we start, wanted to quickly give you a couple of Rogue training related announcements. First of all, we're kicking off our fall training really soon. For those of us that are in the Dallas area or in the Austin area and Cedar Park, we will be kicking off our in-person training for fall races on May 10th, which is a week from this Saturday. So if you want to join us, we've got a kickoff event at our downtown location. Here in downtown Austin, and then we have one at our Mockingbird and Coppell locations in the Dallas area as well. So if you want to join us in person, those would be good days to show up as we always have a good time to kick it off fall training. And then for those that are interested in virtual group training, all of those programs will start the first week in June. And we've got Rogue Rising, we've got Rogue Renegades, and we've now got our new advanced group that is going to continue from our Crushing Boston group with Coach Cathy. So we've got three different options there. I'm going to talk about those more as we progress over the next few weeks. But if you're interested in virtual group training, that's coming up as well. And of course, you can always join us for one-to-one training. And if you have questions about any of it, then email us at coaching at roguerunning.com, and we can point you in the right direction. The other quick announcement I wanted to let you know is that we've started doing some live Q&As on Instagram on Fridays at 2 p.m. Central. Last week, it was James and I, this week, it was just me. But if you want to get your questions answered live in real time, then I would encourage you to jump on our Instagram on Fridays at 2 p.m. Central. We're going to try to do this every week and get your questions answered from James and I. So, hope you plan to join us if you have a question pop in your brain. Obviously, you can always email me, chris at roguerunning.com. Or now, join us on Instagram live at 2 p.m. Central on Friday and log your question there and you'll get a real time answer. So, go check that out. We've done it for a couple weeks now. We've had some really fun and good questions. All right. With that, let's jump into this episode today. Mostly going to focus on listener Q&A, but I've got a quick preamble that I wanted to give you to help you prepare for fall training, for those that are training for September through really November, kind of the sweet spot of those fall races, marathons and half marathons in particular. Then I want you to be thinking about these next few weeks as really your preparation or transition weeks to prepare for this season to come, depending on when your race is. You might start in earnest next weekend or maybe sometime into early June. But basically over the next month, you need to be preparing to get to work to prepare for your fall races. And what does that look like? I want to give you a couple of things to think about in terms of what that looks like. The first is that I want you to be thinking about establishing your routine, making sure you have that routine in place. And so, you may not be fully there yet in terms of the volume you want. That's okay. That's normal. But what you need to be doing over the next several weeks is getting back into the routine, establishing your running days, making sure you have those running days sort of earmarked for their purpose, your quality day, your long run day, your medium long run day, and then your recovery runs that will follow the quality day and the long run day. So get those earmarks. And even if you're not doing speed work at this stage, that's okay. But at least have that run in your routine now so that it's established and ready, and then you can start ramping that up as you get into specific training. So this is all about getting your routine dialed in. Additionally, during these next several weeks, related to the routine is if you're going to be doing strength training, this is the time to make sure you're starting that. So establish those running days, even if you're not necessarily doing workouts yet, but have the day, do some easy running on that day, maybe some strides, further speed work, but just have it all established. You don't have to be at high levels yet, but just have the day reserved. And same thing with strength. Make sure you've got your strength workouts programmed into that routine and start with some very basic strength work. If you're not already there to start to build the routine and establish the load so that your body can adapt to what's coming. So that's the second thing. Make sure you've got strength layered in. And then additionally, I want you to be thinking about how the phases of your training will lay out. You know, how are you going to be thinking about the length of your priming phase or base phase? And then what will be the length of your strength phase and then your race-specific phase? And then, of course, finally, what's that taper length and how does that all map up to a race day in the fall that is your target A race? So be thinking about that now is the time to kind of lay all that out on the calendar so you know how to slot things in and build from here. Because you want to get all of that mapped out now, inclusive of, by the way, the total volume you might be able to expect, where you're going to peak from a distance and volume standpoint. So you have it all established now, you're not just playing it by ear, sort of going by accident as you go, and obviously, all of this is in pencil. It's going to change as you evolve through the cycle, but you want to at least have a plan going in. Then lastly, and maybe most importantly, I want you to be thinking about your purpose for this cycle and relatedly, what is your goal for this cycle? Why are you doing what you're doing? What does it mean to you? And what is the goal that you want on the other side? And connect those dots to really, really lock in and hone in on the reason for doing it. Because that's going to keep you motivated through training, through the ups and downs. And then ultimately, it's going to pay off on race day when you bring that back, because it'll give you that edge, that extra grit and resilience when the going gets tough on the day that matters. So those are some thoughts. As you start to put together your cycle for the fall, it's time to start getting your ducks in a row, get that routine established, and of course have that purpose and the goal top of mind. Now of course, we can help you with all of that. So refer to my aforementioned training options if you want to check those out, and we will be here to walk you through it. All right, let's get to my first question. Here we go. Okay, this one is from Molly who is a 47 year old runner from Syracuse, New York, who has been running consistently for about eight years. Sorry, 18 years. She said, I completed my first marathon in October and thoroughly enjoyed it. I had some surgery at the very end of 2024 that kept me out of my sneakers for about 12 weeks, and I'm just trying to get back into it. I'm run walking and I'm grateful to be out there again, but after such a long break, I'm really sorted back to square one. I wonder if you had any advice about starting over, setting new goals, and what is reasonable to expect in terms of getting back to my old pace. Thanks for the question, Molly. I hope that recovery from surgery is going well and that all is smooth as you build back. I can tell you that I've been in that place before, after having taken breaks by my own choosing after having kids, or perhaps not by my choosing because of injury like stress fractures and things like that. So I've been at that place where I've had an extended time. I would refer you to a full episode I did on this, episode 323 on building or rebuilding your running routine. But I can give you a quick high level overview now. One thing I would say is that the mindset in building back is really important. And there's a couple of thoughts I would say around mindset. The first is that you want to be very, very, very process-oriented and not get ahead of yourself. Because when you're coming back, it's easy to try to think about taking shortcuts or to cut the line or to try to jump volume too quickly. But often what happens in that case is you go too quickly, an injury pops up or maybe the thing you had surgery on starts to squawk at you. And so you want to be very, very focused on process. And with that process, you're going to need patience. But the other point here is that I want you to still dream. And so I've talked about this before, I believe, on the podcast, but I like having in these situations a sort of duality of mind, where you give yourself the space to dream about what you want still, what your big goals are and what the purpose behind those big goals are. But then you don't let yourself linger there or stay there too long because it gets frustrating or depressing because you'll just quickly get to how far away you might be from those dreams. And so what you have to do is then quickly switch to a mindset that's very focused on the present day that asks, what is the next natural thing I can do today to take that next step towards that dream? And so you have to go from dreaming to then getting very practical and present about what's next. Do that next run on the schedule. Do that next baby little workout as you're building back. And then occasionally let yourself dream so you can keep that fire alive inside. But always, always, always revert back to, okay, what's the next logical step? And then if you keep taking those steps, then eventually you'll get back there. I don't know exactly what you're coming back from, so it's hard to give specific context. But once you start resuming a running routine, I think it usually takes anywhere from six to eight weeks to start feeling normal-ish again. And by normal, they don't necessarily mean having those old paces or having the old fitness, but at least to a point where you can start to enjoy running again and see the light at the end of the tunnel, so to speak. And when I advise people to build back, I always tell them to focus on days, then distance, then add quality and speed in that order. And I talk about that on that episode, 323. So days, distance, then quality and speed. What I mean by that is days, you want to build your running routine first, add the days to the calendar that you plan to run as you get into your full routine, and do that incrementally in a way that's pretty bite-sized. So maybe you start with 20 or 30 minute run walk sessions on those days, and you get to doing four or five or six of those, whatever your eventual routine will look like at those same distances. And then once you do that, then you can start to add distance to one or two of those days, not building by more than about 10% a week, as a good rule of thumb in terms of total volume, total miles or total minutes that you might be out there doing it. And during that process, you can start to switch maybe to a little bit less walking and more running as that's feeling comfortable and good. And keep all of those runs at super easy efforts. And then once you start to get that volume up on one of those days per week, then you can consider adding a little bit of speed. And I usually recommend adding strides first as a starting place, and then eventually adding full on speed work. But my recommendation in that episode is to not do that until you get to a long run that is about 10 miles. And so you can really establish the volume first before you start to reintegrate speed. Of course, as I recommend in that episode, you can do strides along the way, but I don't recommend formal speed work until you can get back to a 10-mile long run, because then you'll have the volume established, and then you can start to add and integrate the speed as the final step. So those are recommendations on the flow of things, and you just have to keep dreaming, and then simultaneously ask yourself, what's the next logical step? And yes, you will get there, but I want to make sure that you're realistic about the timeline. I think oftentimes if you're coming back from a period of being out completely, then it takes a full training block, so to speak, five or six months to re-establish that routine, really get back to something close to your old fitness. And then the next training cycle can be about performance again. And I would encourage you to start with something, perhaps a half marathon cycle before you go back to the full marathon again, so you can make sure that that build feels comfortable and you feel like you have your feet under you, so to speak. So give yourself five to six months to re-build fitness and base, doing it in the order I talked about. Then perhaps go do a five month half marathon cycle, maybe chase about a half marathon time that you can get excited about. And then you can go back to the marathon. And while you're 47 years old, you might be thinking, but I'm getting older, I need to do it all right now. And I would say you're very young at 47. Don't worry about that or don't think about age along the way. Stay patient, do this the right way, because you've got 30 plus years of running ahead of you, and you want to continue to take that long view, even though I know it's going to be hard to stay patient along the way, especially coming back like this. So those are my tips for you, Molly. Wish you the best, and coming back from that surgery, I hope it all goes well. All right, the next question comes from Kristen from the Baltimore area. She sent me a long email with a lot of history, but I will fast forward to the questions. She's really working on, particularly building in more zone two running versus previously had done a lot of her stuff at threshold and is really just understanding sort of the importance of the easy running to balance everything out. So her questions are a few, but we'll get to them here. She says, first, how do you combat the ego getting in the way of zone two training when you know you can run faster? It's a great question. I know it's hard for people because for whatever reason, we think that you got to go fast to get faster, and that's just not how it works. I find it interesting, and I talk about this in episode 306. My episode on the importance of slowing down and running. I find it interesting that in weight training, we embrace this concept that we apply in running, but in weight training, we embrace it without even questioning it. In weight training, if we're trying to get stronger, we will happily go do a lot of reps at lower weight and then occasionally test our max. And for some reason, we don't let our ego get in the way of that. It just makes sense to us. But then when we apply the same physiological principle to our running, where we're doing lower weight, i.e. slower paces, for more reps, more reps, more distance, more volume, then for whatever reason, it breaks our brains and we can't handle it. So that's one thing. Just think about the analogy here. In the gym, you don't question it. For some reason, the same principle in running, you question, but I find that interesting. So that's one way to potentially think about it. The other thing for me, honestly, Kristen, is that I think about the end game. If you get really clear on your purpose, you get really clear on what you want, what your ultimate goal is, then you're going to do everything in your power to get that ultimate goal. And if you connect the dots between that goal and the fundamentals of training and the training principles to get there, then to me, it becomes an immediate no-brainer. It's like, of course, I'm going to do the right thing in order to get what I want because I have to slow down in order to get my biggest goals in this sport. And if I don't, I'm going to plateau, I'm going to get injured, I'm going to fall away from it because I'm just doing it the wrong way. And so connecting the goals and the purpose for your goals to the work, to the process is really, really important. And when I do that, particularly when I take a long-term view of the goals, and not just looking at my next race, but looking at what do I want to do in three years, four years, five years time, then it becomes that much easier to obey the fundamental principles because I've connected the dots between what I want and how I'm going to get there. And so that's another thing I would think about. And then beyond that, I would say the proof is in the pudding. If you're just getting into this, then it's hard to believe it and understand it until you've seen it actually work. But if you just commit to this approach and this principle for a period of time, give yourself six months, then you're going to see results come from it. And then once you start compounding those results, then you're not going to go back, because you're going to see the proof is in the pudding. And so those are some thoughts I would give you on how do you combat the ego. But yes, it's hard. But believe me, if you can do it, if you can set that ego aside, it will pay off in spades. And I've seen it happen not only for me personally, but also for all of the people I coach, which is numbers in the probably the thousands at this point. OK, that's question one. Question two, how long does improvement in zone two pace take with moderate strength training? Well, one, I would say it's not necessarily correlated with strength training. What you should see is an improvement in zone two pace coming from a well-balanced running training program, which would include plenty of time in zone one and two, but also having, you know, tapping on the speed once a week as well, even if you're just doing strides once a week, you're going to need all of those things together to see an improvement in your zone two paces over time. But the bulk of it is going to come, honestly, from spending more time in zone one and zone two. And that will allow your heart rate to drop in those zones so that you can eventually extend that zone two to a faster pace. And so it's less about strength training, although strength training is important, and I don't want to say it's not, but it's more about simply making sure you're being consistent with that zone two work. And zone one, two, by the way. And then it will all start to pay off over time. And so you just got to stick with it. And as I mentioned, keep working in just a little bit of speed, even if you're just doing one session of strides a week, because that will help give you some balance to work both ends of the spectrum, both on the speed development and efficiency side, and on the pure zone two heart rate side. So just give it time. But I would say it's going to probably take five to six months of work to really start noticing a difference there. And you may not necessarily notice it in zone two pacing necessarily, but what you will see is that you'll be able to run races faster, like going out and doing 5Ks faster, for example. So that's the second question. Third question, is a 1030 pace for a 10-miler in June a reasonable expectation? The short answer to that is I don't know, Kristen, because I don't think I know enough about you, even though you gave me quite a bit of context. But what I would say is if you're thinking about that, you're probably focused on the wrong thing. I have athletes that I coach and they often ask me these questions, well, you think I can do this by this time? And what I would say, when you're new in your journey, you shouldn't be worried about that. Yeah, sure, have goals, dream, as I just talked about. But more than anything, I want you to be dialed into process and let the results and the outcomes kind of come from that. So, my answer to you really is not to worry about 1030 pace at a 10-miler, but rather worry about executing a good fundamental training program and then let the outcome in June take care of itself. And whatever the outcome is, it's going to indicate progress if you're doing things the right way. And then you're going to be able to build upon that and then let the races start to dictate what's possible going down the pipe. But if we get too focused on outcomes in the near term, especially for newer runners, then you start to take shortcuts. You start to think, oh, well, I have to be running more 1030 pace when maybe that's not even appropriate for you at all, considering the balance of your training. So don't worry so much about outcomes at this stage. I would say focus on process, establishing the routine, building volume, making sure most of your running is in that zone one and zone two range, and then build in just a little bit one day a week of something faster, even if it's just strides to tap on speed, which will help balance it all out. And if you're doing that, you're going to get faster. You're going to have a great race in June. You're going to establish a time to build on, and then you got to keep doing it, because we can keep getting faster for decades if we keep doing the work consistently. And it's so much more than just what happens in a five-month or four-month stint. So don't worry about the 1030. Focus on your process. All right. Next question in her email. This week, I'll probably top out at 15 miles after my recovery run tomorrow, but we'll slowly be ramping up to build a stronger base. Is that the approach you would suggest? I mean, as I've talked about on this podcast before, volume is critical, and more volume, particularly those easy efforts, is absolutely critical. So if you're at 15 miles a week now, that's great. But what I want you to think about is how can I get to 20 consistently? How can I get to 25 consistently? And I wouldn't necessarily do that in this cycle. First, just establish consistency around that 15 to 20-mile range. And again, add one stride session a week. That's probably all you need at this point. And then you'll start to see progress and build consistency around that volume. And then for the next cycle, once you get beyond that race in June, then you can think about maybe building up to 25 miles a week. And to the extent that you can get that number up by maybe 5-mile increments, as you go from cycle to cycle, then you're going to continue to build, you're going to continue to crush it, and you're going to continue to see progress. But you're very early in your journey, Kristen, in what we would call sort of an aerobic baby. And that means that easy volume is going to be king for you. The more you can do easy volume, the better. Just don't build too quickly. And then her last question, which is probably appropriate for this, is what words of wisdom do you have for an impatient human that has a fire in her belly to be the best she can in a world where everyone seems to be better? Well, first of all, Kristen, I would say no one's better than you. What you're doing in starting this running journey and learning the way you're learning is amazing and highly inspiring. And you are worthy of big goals. You are worthy of good coaching. You're worthy of all the smart training principles I talk about on this podcast. So don't look to others and think that they're better than you because what you're doing is absolutely amazing. And I'm not just blowing smoke. I truly believe that. That's why I've dedicated my life to helping people just like you take that next step in your journey. But we've got to address this impatience. And it's great. The eagerness, the passion, the fire to learn is amazing, but we got to make sure we channel it. And we channel it kind of like what I talked about earlier in the prior question, which is that I want you to continue to dream big. Think three, five years down the road. What do you want from this sport? What's the biggest dream you can have? And then simultaneously, to that or immediately after that, think about what's the next logical step that I can take because we just can't rush it. We have to play the long game. And one way I think you can iron out impatience is by having a longer term plan, by thinking about the next 18 months, for example, or the next two years, for example, and what you're going to be doing from cycle to cycle, both in terms of races, but also in terms of how you're building your training in a smart and patient way, so that you keep taking those incremental steps without taking any shortcuts. Because you've got a lot of improvement ahead of you, Kristen. There's so much more to do. But if you rush it, you're going to get hurt, and it's going to be really, really difficult. And you might even short circuit your potential down the road. So play the long game, think long term, and then back up to the present and say, all right, what's the next small step I can take? And if you can channel all of that fire in executing a really good routine now from week to week and channel that same fire and be into being crazy and religious about staying in the right zones in your training, then all of that is going to pay off in such massive ways down the road. But you've got to channel it. Just channel it in the right direction. All right. Thanks for the question, Kristen. I hope that helps. I'm excited about your journey. Please do keep me updated. All right. Next, we have Rishi. And this question is, I want to improve my speed, but I'm stuck physically. My speed is not coming back at all. This stresses me out mentally and loses competitive feeling too. I want to have sub three one more time before I hit 60 years old. I'm 53 now. There are very few females who can accomplish sub three after 60. How can I regain my physical ability and mental enjoyment? I want to continue running when I get old too. I also have to be careful with training not to get injured. Is there training to get faster enough to accomplish sub three as you get older? What do you recommend? Many people around me often get injured from speed training such as 400, 800, and 1K intervals. If I do those intervals, how fast is enough to be productive workouts for me? Good question, Rishi. Rishi used to train with us back in the early stages of the Renegades back in 2018. So it's great to hear from you. She talks about running previously at 254 in 2019, but has gotten a little bit away from that sub three pacing. She is wondering how to get back. I would say a few things, Rishi. First of all, stop worrying about your age. Age is just a number, and sure, at some point down the road, the Grim Reaper is coming for us all. But as the great advice I got from the 73-year-old athlete that I coach, she says that she doesn't think about age unless people ask her about it. And she's still doing big things in the sport. We're in our fastest marathon in 15 years in Houston earlier this year. And so you just can't think about it. It's not helpful, not productive. But beyond that, beyond the mentality of just, hey, dream big, go for it. I love the dream. I'm not going to tell you you can't break three. But there's a couple of things I think you need to be thinking about in order to get back on the path to that. One of them is I'm seeing a lot of over distance racing. You talked about doing the Fuji race in 2023, the 100K in 2024, the full Ironman in 2024, and then the New York Marathon in late 2024. That's a lot of over distance racing. And while that can be fun and amazing, it's not helping you build your speed at this stage. And so you've got to get back to working on the short fast stuff, meaning training specifically for 5Ks, 10Ks, half marathons, in order to make sure you're not losing connection to those faster speeds. So build in some speed tracks, build in some dedicated half tracks, put off the longer races for a little bit. I'd love to see you, for example, do a full year of training without racing a marathon or a distance beyond the marathon, an Ironman or a 100K. Give me a full year. Give me a couple of speed tracks where you're focused on 5Ks and 10Ks in that year. And give me a half track, a dedicated half marathon track. I want to see you get back to being able to do a half marathon in the mid-120s, for example. That would point to you being able to get back to that sub-three time frame in the marathon. So take a break from the distances, the marathons and beyond. Get back to your roots in the faster stuff. Spend a full year focused on those things. I think unless you're willing to do that, then you're not going to get after that sub-three again. Just going to put it that bluntly. And then secondarily, you didn't talk about it in here, but you've got to make sure that you've got strength training built into your routine. The importance of it at that 40 plus age range is just paramount. It can't be understated. The importance of making sure you have strength training built into your routine. And as you age, it's just brass tacks. You just have to do it. So if you don't already have strength training built into your routine, you need to make sure you're incorporating that. And I think to the extent that you can, I would highly encourage you to find a personal trainer that is focused on runners, who understands runners, who can help you put together a routine a couple of times a week. Doesn't have to be more than 45 minutes to an hour to really build that into your routine if you're not already doing it. Because if you don't do that, then it's going to affect your ability to get that sub-three. It will also affect your ability to stay healthy. But I promise you, if you do those two things, if you focus on the short and fast paces for a bit, and if you give yourself that proper strength routine, then you're going to be able to take a swing in it. But you have to be willing to incorporate those things. Ideally, of course, would want you to have a coach that can help you along the way if you don't already, and you know where you can find us. So those are my tips, Rishi, but keep dreaming big and go for it. I think you got this in you, but you've got to make sure you think about those two things I just mentioned. All right, one more question for this podcast from Gregory. He's asking about the mental side of racing, and I will paraphrase his question because he gave a lot of background, but he said, why? How do I find a way to full send and see where it lands me? I'm no stranger to the discomfort of the hard work or the fast paces, and regularly find a runner's sick pleasure and suffering through repeats where I can barely hang on. How do we train ourselves to be willing to go to the hard places and do hard things on the most important of days? Or is the journey the destination and I'm missing the point entirely? Good question, Greg, and I've got two things I'd want you to think about. One is sometimes when people are having trouble going to the well, they're not connected as they need to be, or maybe they haven't thought about it in a while, to their purpose for running, for striving for whatever goals they may still want. In your case, you talked about getting that Boston qualifying goal and coming to run Boston and having a fun and amazing experience there, but not feeling like you could give more. And even in your BQ attempt, you said it was a relatively, quote, comfortable effort. And maybe that's OK, because that was the big goal. That was the big dream at the time. And you were able to get there and sort of get beyond that by making it easy and comfortable to do so. And so now you're sort of left with the question of, well, why does it matter? What is the thing that I want? So I would ask you that first. What do you want? And why do you want it? And you need to be able to connect to that in a real and palpable way, because I've found when we're really connected to our purpose, we're really connected to the why behind the goal, then we really dig into it, because when it gets hard in a race, or when we're not sure if we can do it, or when things are challenging out there, then we reconnect to that purpose, and we just can't stop ourselves. But when we don't have a palpable purpose, when we're not sure what we want, it's easy to not be motivated by it. Now, the tricky part is figuring out what that is, because I have found in my experience as a running coach, is that people are good about listing reasons why they run. They're good about coming up with things that might make sense relative to purpose. But I think you often have to have a partner in thinking about this. Somebody who understands you at a little deeper level, who can ask you the hard questions, ask you the second-order questions of why. But why do you want that to really get underneath what might seem like the surface and to maybe challenge you to stretch you a little bit on connecting to that purpose? And so I think you need a partner in crime in figuring out what this is, whether that be a coach, a partner, spouse, a friend, a running buddy, who knows you well, who can test you, who can maybe understand you a little bit better than even maybe you can yourself and really push you to get to a purpose that is palpable, that you can feel, that makes you want to go deeper in races. So that will be the first thing I would say. And once you've done that, then the next thing I would say is that then it comes down to trying that on for size. And part of how you try that on for size is by doing races. And so this is where I would say step away from the marathon, go get signed up for some 5Ks, some 10Ks, maybe a half marathon, and go find a way to dig and to get to the edge in those distances, because those are distances where you can race them more frequently. They don't require 20 mile long runs in training, and they don't require three weeks to recover. And you can really play with and test your ability to grind and maybe go into those races with goals, but goals that are loosely had, where maybe you intentionally put yourself in a difficult place by going out a little hard. And then you have to hold on for dear life and fight it in the middle of the race itself and pull in all those mental tools, including being connected to your purpose as to what it all means. So then go take some swings, take more at bats at races, and practice going deep, going to the edge, pushing yourself to the limit, and you're gonna maybe get to an end of a race like that, and you're gonna think, oh, I could have gone a little deeper. And that's usually true as we're starting to expand our mind. But then you go out and you get another at bat, maybe three weeks later, if you're doing a couple of 5Ks back to back, and then you're able to go just a little bit deeper. And so we start to flex that muscle, and you pair that with all of the mental tips that I talk about in terms of connecting your purpose, using mantras, using other tools like going fishing, counting, all the things I talk about on my podcast. So then you're able to connect the purpose stuff with all of the practical things I talk about. Apply it in a race, show yourself that it works, get better at it, then you can take all of that back to the marathon distance and just have that edge. And you may not nail it the first time, you may have to take a few swings there too, but you'll have a foundation to build on. So reconnect with that purpose, and then go out and practice it, but do it at the shorter distances so you can take more at bats. And it'll come, because I think you're stronger mentally than you think you are. You just need to reconnect to that edge just a little bit. So there you go. Thank you for the question. All right, that's it. Great questions as always from the listener base. If you have questions, you can certainly email me, chris at roguerunning.com, or join us now on those Fridays at 2 p.m. Central on the Rogue Instagram page. We'll wrap it here. As always, you can check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Facebook or Instagram at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.