Hey, everybody, welcome to episode 384 of the Running Rogue Podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung, joined by new co-host, James Dodds. Excited to be with you in the new year, 2026. So happy 2026, everyone. We're gonna continue stepping through chapter two of our new book, Running the Rogue Way, where we talk about the fundamental principles that we believe in, that fuel everything that we do from a running coaching philosophy standpoint. We covered three of them last episode. We'll get to three more this episode. But first, how are you, sir?

Doing well. It's been a little bit of an overcast day, but I got to run in and life's good. I'm a happy camper.

One thing I wanted to start intro-wise before we get into the next three principles that we're gonna talk about today, I want to talk a little bit about the subtitle of our book, Elite Training Accessible for All. And I'll just ask you, and we'll get the start of the conversation started that way, why is that subtitle so important to us?

There's so many ways to come at this. One, I would say in the most universal way to come at it is once you accept that we humans, we share quite a lot in common, whether pro or brand new beginner, I'm just saying we humans, we really do share a lot in common. And we know that every time we go see a doctor, right? Like we understand that they're going to check a universal temperature within our body and make assessments based on that. Where I'm going with this is, I think it's really, really important to us is because the principles that guide a professional level athlete, you may not have their output. Your legs may not contract at the same rate that Kipchoge's legs contract at. For the time that he can do it. But the principles that are guiding the development of his training, those are the same for the brand new, just now trying it out runner, all the way up to the quote goat. So I think that's probably why we care the most. But I would also say that it's also part of our experience, right? Like we've, that's our core. That's who we are. That's our history. We set out developing like great, well, sorry, it comes off wrong, but elite athletes. And again, you'll learn they're just humans, that you use the same dang principles. One of the best things that ever happened to me as a coach was one of the things that made me the most insecure ever as a coach. And that was within my first year of training. A friend, so there was some rapport and trust, but Aussie Scott, who was a big 12 champion, in the 10K distance, he wanted me to coach him. And I was like, listen dude, I coach everyday adults, but like, I don't know what to do with a guy on your level. Turns out it was just a sign, 85 mile weeks, but all the other principles. His mileage was a little bit higher than the people I was training from 45 to 65, but when it came to managing his personality and what the next workout was, everything was the same. So not only is it something I believed, it's rooted in the Rogue history, and then on a personal level getting that opportunity to realize, okay, this guy ran 228, and I've coached people who've run 458, and on a principle-based level, nothing was different. Their accents were different. Thanks for that laugh.

Their mileage was perhaps different, their paces were perhaps different, but the principles underneath the underpinnings of those plans were the same. And it's interesting to me, people get mad when I talk about this idea, mostly on the faster end of the range, like, no, no, no, elites are so different, you gotta do X, Y, and Z different. And then they'll start giving me examples about how it's different. And those usually fall in the category of differences that you might see across any individuals, regardless of what pace they might be. It's like, well, yeah, this person has different needs, and so we make those adjustments for that person. But there's others where it's gonna be different. Not because they're elite or not elite, it's because they're just one human versus another. And there are some nuances as you start getting to that level of application. But at the core, the fundamental principles apply to all of us. We're all human. We can all benefit from the same physiological principles. And yes, the paces might be different, the volume might be different, but the underlying foundation of the why is the same. And I will take that belief to my grave. So, and not just because, you know, I believe in it, but because I've lived it and seen it, you know, at the full range. One of the quotes that kicks off the intro to the book is one of my favorite quotes in general, which is from Bill Bowerman, famous coach, Nike co-founder, who said, if you have a body, you're an athlete. Meaning, it doesn't matter who you are or what your talent is. If you have a physical body, you're an athlete. And then the question is, are you training that body or not? And so, to me, it's a way to capture this idea that we're all on the same level playing field of being human. And we can all, if we're willing, apply these same principles and reach whatever our personal potential is. And it's going to be different depending on genes and a lot of variables. But if you commit to these principles, you're going to do things for your starting point and your genetic potential that you wouldn't have dreamed of otherwise. And the question is, really, will you give yourself permission to try?

That's powerful. I think people should sit with that question. But I think I said that because I wanted to come back to some of the, I guess, feedback you get that you referenced. But I do believe that question is more powerful for people to sit with. But the apologist in me, always in the kid that talked back to his mom growing up, like it was always like, I'm like, wait, I have something to say on that. You know, like maybe I should trust mom's wisdom here. No, but I do want to speak back to you. I think once people understand the concept of progression overload, I'm trying to take on this idea of like, why do people come at you and say, if it may come down to definitions, if they're saying, okay, an Olympic level athlete, the training is so different. If by different, you mean it's more complex, like the output appears to be more complex, then I could meet you there. But it's still the same guiding principles, one of which would be progression overload. And this week, I was talking to a private athlete and I was encouraging her to, I was like, all right, picture yourself standing on a BOSU ball and you're like rebuilding yourself. It's like, imagine like, you're on the BOSU ball with two feet and it's just, can I stand on it? And then you advance to one foot, standing on it. Then I'll toss you a hacky sack and you catch it. And then I toss you another one and you're tossing them now. And then you start to juggle. So, does it seem like when you just know nothing about running and you step into a spreadsheet or a macro for an Olympic level athlete and you see the complexity of the progression, would you first assume they're so different? Yeah, sure, got it. But I anchored on the word progression for a reason. That's just where their progression overload finally took them. They're operating in spaces where they can't get the next growth without the next stress, so they're doing something new to stress and grow again. But we're going to talk about, all through this book, all the principles that it starts on and grows from. And that's just, that's simple concepts like aerobic develop... not simple necessarily, but concepts like progression overload or anyway, I'm done.

You're done. It woke up in me.

Enough said.

Examples that I think about. I mean, names and faces I can picture where everyday athletes, speaking of progression overload, were able to handle more than an elite, so-called elite athlete was able to handle in terms of whatever volume, intensity of long runs, whatever it may be. I mean, I've had everyday athletes that I've coached that have been able to actually do more than a so-called elite because they had managed their progression to that certain point versus elites maybe coming out of college or whatever who hadn't yet gotten to that place to be able to sustain that progression overload. And they were going to get there, but they weren't there yet. And maybe they were, quote, faster because they had more talent already, but it didn't mean they were the same spot from a training perspective. So, anytime I get people kind of squawking about that, I usually realize that it's not about the philosophical answer to the question. It's more about wanting to gatekeep. And that's what we see. And I see it in our sport. It's not as prevalent now as it was 21 years ago when Rogue was founded, but still there are pockets of our sport now where people want to gatekeep it. And they say, well, you can't have access to that part of the lessons that we've taken from the sport over decades, because you're not fast enough. You're not at the right point in the pack. You don't look a certain way. You don't wear clothes a certain way, whatever it may be. And so therefore, we have certain people that might be listening that are told either directly or indirectly that they're not worthy of the principles that we talk about. They're not worthy of a coach. They're not worthy of training in a group that might be progressing towards reaching certain goals. And yet, we're here to say, no, no, no, no. Not just say, but we have a particular passion for the fact that anybody who puts one foot in front of the other can have access to those principles, can apply them, can apply them in ways that they wouldn't have dreamed about and then get things goal-wise that they wouldn't have dreamed about. So it just opens up this spectrum for people that have been for so many years told they can't. And then suddenly, we're here to say, no, no, actually you can. Yes, we have to reach into your world and start where you are. We can't suddenly jump 10 steps ahead, but it's all with the same fundamental stuff that I would take to apply to an elite athlete who was at whatever part of the spectrum that they were on at that moment. And so, if you're listening, it kind of gets back to that permission question. Will I give myself permission to apply these principles? Will I give myself permission to believe in that they can work for me too, regardless of what I think about my genetic potential or my abilities or what pace I'm at? Will you give yourself permission? If so, buckle up.

Yeah, yeah. Well, and you just made me think too. It's like, and imagine how much, until you do it, you won't know how much joy you'll experience, even just eating up as much of the continuum curve or progression curve that you can. You know, when I came to Rogue, I'll share my times because they're fairly humble and very approachable. It's like when I first came to Rogue, my very first marathon was just right at five hours. I mean, it was a death march and it hurt. And after a few years, it was 336. Are those numbers that you can brag about in front of pros or elite athletes? No. But what it feels like to drop almost an hour and a half off of your entire marathoning experience, that's a pretty good feeling. And same with the 10K. I came to Rogue wanting to break an hour in the 10K and I broke 40 minutes in the 10K. To cut 21 minutes off of even your aspirational goal? It's like, come on, if you want to run, you want to experience... I'm telling you, that experience is pretty great. There's nothing better than being able to accomplish something you set out to do. Talked last week about dopaminergic systems. Talk about getting a really big signal from your brain. It's like, come on, that's pretty freaking great.

Well, and what if you had been told and you believed that, hey, no, sorry, James, you're not fast enough. Five-hour marathon is not fast enough to apply this stuff. What if you believe that? Then you wouldn't have been able to run an hour and a half faster. And what if you were genetically talented like Kipchoge? Then you would be a two-hour marathoner applying these same principles. But just because your genetic potential was different doesn't mean you can't apply it in a way that can be pretty damn fulfilling in your own world, from whatever your own starting point is. We like to say there's no slow, only degrees of fast if you're doing any of the things that we talk about. And so, who am I to judge you because you weren't born with certain DNA connections that somebody else was born with? So anyway, that was me on my soapbox. But hopefully the message that you guys get at home is that, hey, we care about this stuff for every single athlete. Elite Training Accessible to All truly means all. If you're listening to this podcast, if you find the book and you're willing to turn the pages and read it and apply it, then you're worthy. You're good enough. I don't care where you are in the pack. And I hope, I just hope that somebody will hear that and be inspired and motivated to go do it.

Yeah. So start of the year. Why not?

There you go. And that's right. Here we are. Beginning of 2026. Own that fact. If you have a body, you're an athlete. So let's train like one. All right. We're going to step into the next three principles that we talk about. This is all in chapter two. It's really the kind of double click on our, the why behind our training philosophy. We talked about three already in last episode, at the end of last year. Do the work, be consistent, miles matter, and you got to go slow to go fast. Those are kind of the first three in the chapter. And then we're going to hit the next three, starting with respect to the purpose of each day. Respect the purpose of each day. And this one, I mean, they're all important, but I can't overstate the importance of this one. One of the biggest mistakes I see runners make is going out and trying to do the same thing every day. And I don't look at that and look down upon that. It's just, I get it. I mean, it's, if you think, well, I want to get faster, what are you going to do? You're going to go out and you're going to run whatever loop you have access to, and you're going to try to run it every day or every other day a little bit faster than the last. And you're going to think, if I do that, then I'll get faster. And logic would tell you that potentially. We're here to say that that's flawed logic. But not throw stones at those that have been down that path, because a lot of people I coach for the first time have been. But what you find when you go down that path is that you end up plateauing because you're not working the full system. And it doesn't all fit together in a way that's additive. So we'll talk about this as we go through the book. Your routine should look dynamic. There's at least four different types of runs that you should have during your week. There's the long run. There's the speed workout or quality workout, as we call it. There's what we call the medium long run. And all these will do specific episodes on. And then there's the recovery run. So it's four different types of days. All have different purposes. All might look different from a pace perspective. And if you're running five or six days a week, which is what we recommend people build to, four out of those five or six days are going to be different from each other. And that's how you get where you want to go. But you got to understand the nuance of that routine and then respect the purpose of each day as it comes.

Yeah. I'd say we capture it by saying easy days, easy hard days, hard, right? There's got to be both a polarity as well as, what's that old statement? A variety is the spice of life. But we know it from the science. What's cool is that we have the science on our side to explain this. But I think when people understand, Physiology 101 is like you stress or tear a muscle and then let it recover. Even that differentiation, I think can help people realize like, oh yeah, not every day can have the same exact purpose. Like you need to know what you're up to for that day and why you're doing it so that you don't get stuck in that, every day I go to my same route and I run the same exact pace every single time. Yeah, each day has a purpose. I'm thinking of a personality example. I've shared this with you before, but I'm like, as someone who grew up always trying to be on, I've worked in sales roles and everything and just also just lack of maturity throughout lifetime. You know, you start trying to be one thing all the time to all people only to throughout life realize, wait, no, no, no. Different settings require different energy or different seasons of life require different mantras or intentions or focal points, right? And so it's like, in the same way that you can't just memorize the same answer for every conversation you have with every friend, rather you want to talk to a friend, how they want to be talked to, you need to approach your training in the same manner. It's like, what's the purpose for this day so I can get the most out of it? And then if now it's a recovery day or now I'm supposed to be on for quality or now I'm supposed to gear up and make sure I have goo to last through a long run. It's like, I'm just trying to further drive home this idea that like, in the same way that your day to day life sets you up for a variety of different ways by which to operate, you should approach your training in the same manner. And we can defend that with the science as well.

Yeah, and to use an analog and an analogy, going back to the strength training analog that we used last time talking about building the aerobic system and how you have to do high volume, low intensity most of the time, and then occasionally test your max in strength training as well as in running. To use that same analogy or analog a little bit more crudely this time, it's kind of like when you go to lift, you're not going to lift the same muscle group every day. You know, you mix it up. Some people might mix it up, legs one day, upper body another day, or they might do full body, different body parts, but you're not doing, you're doing multiple days a week of strength training. You're not necessarily hitting the same muscle groups every day. You're mixing it up because you have to in order to build those things independently, because the muscular system is a system. And the aerobic system is the same way. Again, it's not a direct analog, but we have different parts of our aerobic system that we need to work, and that's why you have to work different things on different days, just like you would do different body parts on different strength days. Same kind of analog concept. And then there's the kind of analogy, the more metaphorical approach, which might resonate with others, which is this idea that I like to use of building a puzzle. You know, if you're trying to build a complete puzzle that has a picture and you can see the box and you're like, okay, that's what I want, and I've got a thousand pieces over here, I've got to assemble them into a puzzle. Well, puzzle, in this metaphor, is an erase or getting a goal. And the pieces are all the different components that you have to put together to be able to do that, to get that complete picture. And running and training for a goal is like that. You know, if you had a thousand of the same piece, you wouldn't get to the picture. You gotta have a thousand of different pieces. And I mean, it's not as complex as a thousand pieces necessarily in running, but it's a lot more pieces than you think, because you've gotta do all these different purposes for each day, plus even within that, you know, a quality workout or a speed workout is gonna evolve as you go through a cycle. So even with that and that, there's a lot of different pieces that kind of go into the quality section. There's a lot of different pieces that go into the long run section. There's a lot of different pieces that go into building the medium long run. And then of course, the recovery runs are kind of the little glue pieces that stick it, that make everything stick together. And then there's a lot more components of that, from fueling to hydration to recovery and sleep and everything else. So you put all those pieces together and you have a complete picture. If you had just one piece, which would be running the same pace and the same loop every day, you would never get to a complete picture. So to me, that's another metaphor that can help people who struggle with this idea of, well, I want to run a race in a certain time. Why am I not running that race and or I'm not running miles at that time very much? And why am I not practicing that distance, maybe even at all at that pace until I go do it in the actual day? So, an analog, the strength training analog and then the metaphorical puzzle analogy, hopefully one of those will resonate with you. But it's just so important to get. And this is where we talked about people get bad about elite training and applying that to all. Another place where people get mad is when we talk, when I talk about junk mileage. My definition for junk mileage is any mileage that you run that's outside the purpose of the day or of the workout. People don't like that either. Because then I guess, because they mainly, they think I'm talking about them, maybe they start to feel guilty. Then I'll get messages like, but my friends were doing, so why can't I just hang with them? Well, were your friends running at the right pace for you on that day? No? Okay. Well, then maybe you shouldn't have hung with them. And if you did, that's a choice, but just recognize that that's a choice to do mileage that's not going to help the overall goal.

Yeah. That's why Lyddiards, like when you see it as recipes, instead of just like, I don't know what the alternative is, so let's just stick with that. But when you see it as recipes, it's wild. Like as a coach, I remember when the visions first started flashing in my head, like when I would literally be cooking an egg, and like four of my athletes are coming to mind, and I'm like, it's all starting to make sense. I'm almost like, I can see how the great coaches started to arrive at these like metaphors with recipes and everything. And you know, Lyddiard used the baking a cake analogy. And so if it's like, once you start to see there's certain amount of ingredients that you need, then it's an easy question of like, okay, well, what ingredients? You listed those. You need your medium long run, you need your quality, you need your long run, you need your overall mileage development. It grows the aerobic engine. We talked about that ATP creation, et cetera, et cetera. So what we're doing is trying to build a recipe in order to get the final product to look like a wedding cake on a very specific day. So we're taking on a very comprehensive undertaking. Like we're looking at 22 weeks combined, broken up and spread out. And so I think when athletes take that comprehensive, like bigger picture view of the whole thing being a recipe, delivering a specific result on a specific day and time, then perhaps it's a little bit easier to ease into that mindset of like, yeah, I need to look at different days for different things because I'm trying to grow each ingredient. I want enough eggs for my cake when it's time. I want enough flour at the time. I want enough sugar at the right time. I want enough butter at the right time. It's like you're going to need all of it. And what we're trying to do is actually often prevent you from losing your entire season and losing your entire race altogether because you focused on one single ingredient which won't produce a cake. If you went after one pace, as fast as, like, let's say one route, as fast as you could repeatedly, you would do that until something broke down. It could be a hormonal thing because of the endocrine system. It could, like, our electrical, our neuromuscular, it's like, we're an electrical system. Things aren't firing now. It could be overuse injury within soft tissue or a busted bone. It's like, I'm telling you, there's so many ways to break an athlete down. Again, whether it's psychologically, emotionally, on the electrical level, on the bone level, muscle tears, et cetera. There's so many ways by which to break. We've learned that from the books we read, the experiences we have, the athletes we've probably both broken at times. I've broken people I really care about. And so I think it's an important concept to us because, one, we know why they're there. Two, we're trying to broaden the whole outlook to the 22 weeks or 25 weeks of training that need to come together. And to ensure you're able to do as much as possible without breaking. Because if you break the whole season, it was all for naught anyway. You lose the whole season in the race all at once.

I use the puzzle analogy, use the baking analogy. One thing I like about the baking analogy is that how do you know you nailed the cake? How do you know the cake is going to taste good? It's this equivalent question to, how do I know I'm going to be able to run this goal on this day? You don't until you taste the cake when it's already done.

Or think about weddings, right? Nobody plays around with their wedding cake. They go to the cake maker who's produced so many damn good cakes that they're like, I can rely upon that. We are cake makers. We are quite experienced in our making of cakes. Sorry, I had to go for that.

It's the same idea though. It's like, well, you don't know.

Yeah, you don't.

If you did know, then you would have already done your race. Just like the cake maker doesn't know that the cake was perfect until literally the bride and groom are tasting it in front of everybody watching in the biggest moment of their perhaps lives to that point. And we put a lot of emphasis on race days, all of us who have big goals, but we all struggle with that idea of well, what if, how am I going to know whether or not I can do it? Well, you don't until you do it. And how do you do it? Put together the recipe the right way with all the subcomponents, the ingredients, and or you build the puzzle the right way with all of its pieces. So you got to respect that. And if you don't respect it, then again, you can take shortcuts, you can cheat the system so to speak, but it's going to come back to haunt you at some point, either in a goal not achieved, an injury, or perhaps plateauing in a way that doesn't allow you to reach your full potential. And that doesn't mean you can't have fun within the framework. There's plenty of it to be had within the framework. But if you're focused on a particular goal, if you want a recipe to turn out with the cake tasting perfectly, then of course you're going to follow the recipe.

Yeah.

Why wouldn't you? Like, do you want a bad cake? No. Do you want a puzzle that doesn't work? No. So that's point four in chapter two, but point one of today. And I want to also relate this back to our conversation a couple of episodes ago, where I was talking about the underlying effort and how we were talking about going by feel and how that's a struggle for people. And this is where I think those two things come together, because in that episode I was talking about the need to be able to understand the purpose of each of those days and the associated efforts on each of those days from long runs to medium long runs to quality workouts and recovery runs. And those two things in my mind go together really, really well and importantly is you want to not just know what paces you should be running on each day. More than that, you want to understand what's the effort level I'm trying to achieve to make sure that this piece of the puzzle or this ingredient contributes the way it should to the overall recipe or puzzle. Because if you're just relying on your watch, you can do it, but you're missing kind of underlying point. You're also not able to necessarily apply the right principles when something is off. Like if you're not feeling well on a given day or if it's hot, if your long run was hotter than you think and the recovery run the next day is therefore needing to be slower versus just saying, oh, well, I'm supposed to run 10 minute miles on my recovery day, so I'm going to go run 10 minute miles. Instead, you need to be saying, no, the point of my recovery day, the purpose of it is to get movement, to create blood flow, to promote healing from that long run the prior day. Is that served by running 10 minute miles? Maybe, maybe not. What if I instead listen to my body and do what it's telling me to do, and maybe that day it needs 11 minute miles or 12 minute miles to be comfortable and to recover? Are you in tune with that concept, and can you manifest it through your effort or not? And that's harder to learn, but it is an important part of this one.

Yeah, well, and in knowing the purpose of each day, like even being able to, like if you know the purpose of the day, and that day happens to be recovery, I think that helps give people, again, out there training on their own, default dispositions. Like when I was in high school, and I was in a choir class, my choir instructor always said, I want you guys singing loudly, because when you miss, I want you to miss big. I want the signal to be clear. So I'm like, boom, call out, let's fix that and we'll go back. And so where I'm going with that is sort of like, if you're out there just trying to navigate your training on your own, and it's, well, how would I know if I was supposed to need 10 or 11? Well, if you have that checkpoint, today's a recovery day, when in doubt, you probably should lean towards the miss big. Go so slow that you're like, all right, I ended up at 10.30s and that was the sweet spot. But it's like, miss in the right direction and kind of lean further that direction, as opposed to tightening it all in too close.

Yeah, because then there's this expectation that faster is better and some days it's not.

Definitely not on a recovery day.

So, that's point one for today, respect the purpose of each day. That last conversation dovetails nicely with point two for the day, point five in the chapter, which is recovery is as important as the work itself. And this one, you know, I think, again, they're all important, but it's hard to stress this one enough. I think the way that I like to stress this one is by reminding people that you don't get faster from the work, you get faster from recovering from the work. And again, going back to the strength analog, you don't build muscles when you're lifting, you tear them down actually when you're lifting, so that they can build back stronger when you're not lifting and when you're recovering from that work. And then the same is true in our running world. We don't get fitter doing the long runs or the speed workouts directly, we get fitter when we're recovering from those things. And so that means recovery is really, really important. Or as we like to say, you got to balance the stress with the rest. Now when we talk about recovery and when we talk about rest, we're not talking about ice baths and massage guns and red light therapy or sauna or any of that stuff. While they might have a place in recovery for you, there's more fundamental things in our vernacular that are defining characteristics of recovery. It's really three of them, one being easy movement. So recovery running is an absolutely critical part of recovery. And if you're not doing the easy movement to be paired with every single harder long day, the next day, then you're not going to actually be able to assimilate the work. So that's the first fundamental of recovery is easy, active rest, easy movement. And then the second is sleep. Third is fueling. Those are the fundamental things. It's not sexy and it's not something you necessarily think about that much. But unless you're balancing those things appropriately, not that you have to be perfect, but unless you're balancing those things appropriately, you're not going to be able to assimilate the fitness building from the hard work and the long work that you want in order to get where you want to go. So you've got to make sure you're emphasizing recovery in the overall equation. I do think there's a lot of emphasis on recovery in a sense in kind of the social media worlds, but it's largely focused on the things we have to pay for, the Wismang stuff, the ice baths and the saunas and the technology. And while those things might have a place, although I think the science on a lot of them is a little bit debatable as it relates to recovery as a specific kind of component, differences for like sauna and longevity, you know, no scientific debate really about sauna and longevity. But is it a recovery tool? That's a different nuanced discussion. Same with ice baths. But going back to the fundamentals is what is important here. Easy movement, sleep, fueling, especially after the hard and long days. If you're not doing those things as well, you're not going to be getting the benefits of the work the way you need to.

Yeah. I like the way you came at it because the way I'm starting to see it in my mind as you hit both of those spectrums, it's similar to our technology talk a couple of weeks ago now, I guess. But the worst thing that happens is when people only get laser focused on those offerings, whether it be infrared, whether it be ice baths, whether it be your, what are those, NordicTrack, is that the brand for the pants and the boots and compression socks?

Normatec, yeah.

They're guns, it's like, I'm actually kind of like, in a kind of down the middle of the road way, I would say that I'm, I think it's all great. They're all great that they're there. I think at the core though is sort of like, people who use that and neglect these fundamentals that you mentioned, it's more like it should be like, I've got, like if you're not hydrating, eating enough, sleeping and taking easy days easy, then every dollar spent on all those other things is just a waste. It's again, back to an additive perspective. It's like if you're, if you, like you said, we may never feel like complete masters, but if we get people concentrating on that first, people who nail those but never purchase anything, I would make a firmer bet on, then people who buy all of these things but neglect those. So if people are going to slip into black and white thinking, I know where we're going to put our marker. But if you're looking at it through a both-and lens, then I'm like, cool, I'll let some of the technology back in, go for it, it's great. I'm not ever going to ridicule someone for laying down after a run at Rogue and using the Theragun. I mean, we provide all this stuff for those reasons. It's great, it's wonderful, but get this right first.

Yeah, and don't overlook it, as you said. Don't jump to those whiz-bang solutions without at least assessing your core. Recovery practices, and the most important one in our world, when it comes from a X's and O's running standpoint, is that easy, active rest, which is not sitting on the couch. It's getting out there and going as slow as you possibly can. Glossially slow, we like to call it, in order to move the legs so that they create blood flow, which promotes healing so that you can then go to the next long or hard day. And going back to something we talked about last episode in terms of people being able to do the work and put in the miles. Usually when they come to me and they say, well, I can't run more than three days a week or I'll get hurt. Or they come to me and they say, well, you know, if I do that much mileage with speed as well, then I'll get hurt. They come to me with that, then usually what's happening is they're going too fast all the time and they're not getting in those easy recovery days the way they should. If they really learn to slow down on the easy days, then it kind of all fits together in a really magical way that they that might surprise them, that they just didn't realize because they were doing it wrong. So make sure you're going painfully slow on the recovery days to the point where you can't go too slow. And one thing I like to encourage people to do is to actually set targets and practice going slower, certain paces, for example. You know, if your recovery runs are normally 10-minute miles and that feels pretty reasonable, what if, what if you did an experiment and you just ran 11-minute miles for your recovery runs for a couple of weeks, what would happen? How would you feel? And it's going to be awkward because it's awkward sometimes going slower than you're used to. But if you master it, then it opens up this new skill set where you're like, okay, so when I do my even harder stuff, now I can pull in this 11-minute recovery run and feel really good about it. And maybe a 12-minute recovery run. And it just unlocks tools in your tool belt that allow you to recover from the challenging stuff. More, so that when you start to build and add layers to complexity of that progressive overload we've talked about, then you have more arrows in your quiver, so to speak, to be able to recover from those things.

Thinking of Mr. Miyagi's wax on, wax off. And it fits.4 purpose of each day, right? It's like to the degree that you go hard, you need to go easy. Well, I mean, maybe shouldn't say it exactly in that way, but it's like, we got it, we got it. Even from a biochemical perspective, like, I like to put in my head, like, acid. You know, if you go hard, then that's acid. You're like, literally, there's a byproduct that lactate buffers, and that's what we know to quote be lactate or lactic acid. Like, it's like, if you've ever had a friend with rhabdo, and if you haven't, go talk to a friend that's experienced rhabdo, it's like, you don't want to go there, I promise. You will, you over train like that, and you remain acidic repeatedly long enough, your own muscles will start to eat themselves. It's like, embrace this one. There's not only an incredible benefit in doing it in the way of outcome, but also the day to day, the process itself will be far more enjoyable if you lean into this one.

Yeah, and you'll get a lot more out of your hard and long days as a result. And that's part of the benefit. As a slight digression, I don't think we've ever talked about this directly, but there's a lot of people that talk about the advent of super shoes as being something that allows people to do more hard work because they can quote recover from it faster because you've got the carbon fiber spring effect with them. So your legs aren't getting as beat up when you go do a hard tempo run, for example. And so there's talk in the elite training world that they can now get in an extra workout in a 10-day period because of the super shoe element. And there may be something there. I don't know. I think it's all still to be determined. But the thing I always and there's also relatedly people that say, well, I can also do more marathons in a year because I can recover now more from more quickly because I've got this carbon fiber plate that's throwing me forward and I don't have to use my own muscles as much. And maybe that's a part of it, but I always sit back and think, what about the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous system? What about the mental fatigue of going hard and racing too much? We're sort of casting away the other effects of hard work or hard racing when we're just focused on, well, maybe the muscles aren't quite as beat up because of this element, but you still have all those other layers of fatigue. And so, I'm just not convinced as a coach that we've got this new tool that can allow us to race more or do more hard workouts without cost at some point. Maybe not within a specific cycle, but over the long haul for sure, because you're not activating the other elements of recovery that go beyond just muscle soreness, you know, that are the mental recovery pieces, the kind of turning off the sympathetic nervous system so that the parasympathetic nervous system can work, which then has a health ripple effect through your whole body that goes well beyond just soreness in your muscles. So anyway, that's a bit of a digression, but to me, it comes back to this point of, there's no shortcuts when it comes to recovery. You have to take your medicine, easy movement, sleep and fueling at the minimum. If you want to layer in those other things, do it, but don't forget the fundamentals. Yeah. All right, so that's number five. Recovery is as important as the work itself. You build fitness, get faster when you recover from the work. Number six, which I think kind of dovetails back to the way we started this podcast, talking about Elite Training Accessible for All and how sometimes I think parts of the sport kind of gatekeep stuff. In that context, we were talking about the training principles. But I think there are people that might be out there that might also not realize that, hey, I am worthy of a coach. I'm worthy of training in a group format. Again, I don't care where you are in the pack. You're worthy of those things. And so our last principle to talk about today is there's strength and accountability in a team. And yes, you can do it solo. Running is a great solo sport if you want it to be. But if you want to get the most out of yourself and truly reach your potential, then at some point you'll find strength and accountability in a group. And we'll talk about it. There's a lot of different forms of that. But again, tying back to that first part, I want to say, regardless of where you are and whoever's listening, you're worthy of a coach. You're worthy of a group to train with. And there's different versions of that, depending on your situation, who you are, where you live, all of those things. But if you're serious about getting faster, don't neglect that part.

I think almost every great athlete would agree with you. It's like, again, to steal from life itself. It's no man's an island. We're pack animals. It, quote, takes a village. All cultural tacit admissions of I need people. We just do. We're pack animals. And so we're always going to go further or faster when we have people around us. I feel compelled to just talk about the benefits because it's hard to almost defend that from a case building perspective because I'm like, I hope people aren't struggling with accepting that this is a good idea. But I can tell you that it's like your motivation ebbs and flows. It can wane, right? And so it's like when you're training with a group, you might be the guy kind of carrying the torch of energy and excitement and saying, no, we're going to see all through 12 reps through, you know, we got this or, you know, to our best of our ability. And then like on your fourth week, you're just the, your brain won't work. And you can like sit quietly and let someone else on your pack just like pull you along. And I'm telling you in those kinds of moments, as a rule, maybe there's some individuals that are super, super just like high accountability and can effectively train themselves alone, the majority of the time, like as a rule. But in the exception windows, that's where it really shows up. That one week you really needed someone, or maybe when you were being a hothead and you needed a teammate to pull you back, and the friendships, the countless friendships that I've made, I think, I mean, for me, I can at least defend on my end of like one of the best things of the running experience are the people that I've met through the experience. And if you think about it, like where else do you find so many people that are at least all able to say we agree upon one thing and that's we're willing to take on challenge in the spirit of becoming better. I mean, I want those kind of people in my life. And generally speaking, I give almost all runners a certain level of respect just by being a group-based runner, period. Because I'm like, you're making these like even if you didn't come to it with all these thoughts and all these words, you were just like, I just woke up and come. It's still, it's like you're saying I need people. You're saying you're willing to do the work. You're saying you understand that hard work actually does produce some kind of outcome that you actually want to desire and you're not sure if you can get it without the help of other people. I'm like, there's so much loaded just in the act of showing up. So I'm incredibly thankful for the friendships I've made along the way, the way people have helped me when I was slacking, the opportunity to have been someone that helped someone else when they were falling backwards. It's like, there's a richness to it and I don't even know what else to say. I just wanted to respond with like my emotional response.

Yeah, well, I mean, again, the benefits are relatively easy to sell. I think, you know, the resistance comes in my, and as I'm thinking about it kind of in three forms, there will be some people that say, well, I prefer to go on my own. And that was me when I first started as a runner. I was an introvert. It was my way to process the world's problems and kind of get away from people. And I had a very people intensive job at the time and didn't have that extra space for me oftentimes because I was traveling a lot and working in a people oriented environment. So that was my escape. It's like, let's go do this on my own. But even at the time, I had a buddy who wasn't in the same place with me physically, but was training for similar races. And we'd be sharing notes and saying, hey, what did you do today? I did this. Did you do that? And we were kind of following similar schedules. And so while the actual act of running was mostly solo for me, I still had that accountability. And that's where I think this conversation of there's a lot of different versions of this. And there's versions that I think kind of fit any orientation from those that want to run every run with somebody to those that want to run a lot on their own, but still be connected to a bigger community that can help guide them. So that's one point of resistance I think people get. The other point is, well, I don't have access to it physically. We don't have that kind of stuff where I live. And of course, if you're in Austin and Dallas, you can get access in person to Rogue Running groups. But now, especially in this post-COVID world, there's so many virtual options. We have them, three different virtual groups, depending on your experience level and mileage level. We've got virtual one-on-one coaching, which isn't a group necessarily, but it is a partner that you can connect with as a coach to guide you. And then, of course, there's our free Instagram Q&As on Friday at 2 p.m. where some people are connecting to us that way, and they're getting guidance that they're taking back into their running world. So access is one, but now with the virtual access that we have, I think it's kind of like, I'm sorry, that one, that's not an excuse you can use anymore.

Yeah.

Just at Rogue, we have so many different virtual access points, and there are many, many other places that do. And then the third you get is cost. It's like, well, I can't afford it. And there I'm like, well, okay, well, I got you there too. One, there's a lot of free resources, and this being one of them, and our Friday Q&A's are free. But also, there's even within our world, different payment expense options. You've got our $60 a month virtual groups. You've got our 85 to 95 in-person groups. And then you've got, of course, higher priced one-to-one options. But from free to fully committed one-on-one with a coach, virtually, you've kind of got every price point you could potentially follow. And then, of course, there's the, well, hey, grab a neighbor or a friend or a sibling or your partner and read the book, follow along in the podcast and try to apply it in your own world and occasionally pop on YouTube and ask us a question and learn that way. So there's degrees of it. And to me, it's like I can shoot down anybody's excuses for not being willing to access community to support them and doing it because it helps you have people to hold you accountable. It pushes you to places you couldn't push yourself and gives you access to information that might help you fill your blind spots.

Yeah. You know, you brought up a couple of things or caused a couple of things to like pop into my mind and to kind of come in at that back end there. I was thinking of like the smallest step towards it in 2026 because you were providing a lot of ideas. And I was thinking even the power of a kudos, like just people being on Strava and being able to someone acknowledging their work. Like I think I've I think I'm so fully convinced on this because the help ability of community that we've both witnessed in the virtual environment. And I think at the very least, it's connected to the idea of like someone seeing your work helps you feel like your work matters. And again, there's a tough personality out there that's going to respond to that in their mind, at least with, I don't need no one to tell me that. But again, we're humans. I know me, so I know you. We are very different. There are degrees of introversion and crazy old extroversion over here. I'm a capital E extrovert. So we may have varying degrees of needs, varying degrees of need for like human interaction, but there is no single individual that's a true lone wolf. And again, I take all of this as I've witnessed what's happened through the training communities as we offered them. I think there was, when I was first coming in and coaching with you on the Renegades platform, you had said, hey, can you hop into this? And I was curious, like, our local stuff's so on fire. How could, how can you possibly transfer the fire via the microphone? Like, I don't, I don't get this, but those doubts were covered quickly. I mean, like when I hug, when we go to a destination race and I hug someone in a lobby of a hotel, like three hours later, it'll hit me that I'm like, that was the first time I ever met that person in real life. Like, because just these interactions on message boards, like the community transfers, it does, and it's powerful. And I think people knowing that someone else cared about their training, saw the place they started and where they progressed to, or maybe they started high and then a friend helped them through an injury phase, et cetera. It's like, all I can say is that it's palpable. We have felt it.

It's palpable. And as we've talked about, in many ways, our virtual communities are stronger in some ways than our in-person ones. Not because one's better than the other. They're just different flavors of the same thing. And the structural nature of an in-person group is that you've got a bunch of people running. And by definition, because they're different paces, they're physically separated during an interval. But in our virtual group message board platform, they're not physically separated at all. They're all interacting at the same level. And yeah, they're physically separated by distance. But in that space, they're all together. And so the connectivity kind of front to back of PAC, so to speak, in terms of paces, is actually stronger than what we get with our in-person groups, where there's a natural physical separation that happens through a workout, not because anyone's better than the other, but simply because they're running different paces that suit their needs. And therefore, they're not meeting the people necessarily as well that are in the different pace groups. But in that virtual environment, you get to have that richness of interaction kind of front to back, at least as long as you're willing to engage with it. And so therefore, we've seen just this palpable culture within those groups that transcends miles and miles of space and oceans as well. And when they meet each other in person, it's like they're old friends, which is really, really cool. So that's a little bit of selfish plug. And this isn't a sales pitch for us exclusively, but it's more to say that, look, you're great by yourself, you're great by yourself, but you can be better with others, whether that be a coach or a team. And by the way, regardless of your pace, you're worthy of it. So we encourage you to find the format of that that works for you, whether that be the neighbor down the street or whether that be joining a group like ours or somebody else's, because you will be faster and stronger for it, and you'll probably enjoy it more, too, because again, that community is really, really cool. So that's number six for today. We covered respect to the purpose of each day. Recovery is as important as the work, and then there is strength and accountability in the team. So seek it. Any final thoughts on this one, this first episode of 2026, before we sign off?

I don't have anything that's compelling, that's pushing inside me.

Well, I'll just say, kind of go back around to what we started with, which is that Elite Training is accessible to all. That includes everybody who might be hearing this podcast. We hope you pick up the book so that you can fully own that. If not, listen along and watch along as we go through these episodes talking you through it. But we're talking to you, every single one of you that might be out there who found this video or this podcast. And there's something in it for you. And we mean that with the purest of hearts. So we hope you listen. As we wrap this one, I'll remind you, you can find this on YouTube. If you go to YouTube and search Rogue Running, we've got these episodes now being posted in video format as well. You can always find them on the audio pathways through Apple Podcasts and Spotify and wherever you might get your podcasts. You can also check out information about us and our training at roguerunning.com or follow us on the Facebook or the Instagram at Rogue Running. I think that's it for this one.

You're getting good at this. I'm like, do we have all those channels?

We will talk to you soon, but thanks for joining us for this one.