Hey, everybody, this is episode 137 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is Chris coming at you from Austin, Texas with a special Rogue guest. Jen Harney is joining us. How are you doing today, Jen?

I'm tired, but I'm here, I'm doing good.

Present, present. Jen was also on episode 16 where we talked about women and running. We talked about lots of fun things on there, like periods and stuff. So if you want to go back and listen to Jen, you can. Jen is one of our coaches here at Rogue and one of our primary curriculum writers who helps write our master programming for our Rogue groups that guides how we structure training now for groups all over the US here with Austin, Dallas and New York. So excited to have you on, Jen. Before we start, Jen, I think we gave a little bit of background when you were on before, but it's been a few episodes. So let's get a little background on you as a coach. How did you get to this place with us as a coach?

Let's see, I started in 2003 coaching high school track and cross country at a 4A school in Fort Worth, the inner city school, and then moved to Round Rock and coached there briefly. And then started coaching on my own and eventually worked at Luke's Locker and developed training for them and did a bunch of various things as a training director here in Austin. And then you hired me in 2014.

Five years.

I know.

That's crazy.

It is crazy. But yeah, so.

Why did you want to get into it?

Into coaching? Oh, because I love what running has brought to my life. And I wanted to share this sport with so many other people and create a love for running for a lifetime. And not just for a small period, but create runners for life.

And now you're coaching with us in Cedar Park. You lead our team road group that trains out of Cedar Park. What does it mean for you now to coach adult athletes? Because you started with high school level, so now you're coaching adult athletes. Do you see differences or how is it?

I mean, yes, there are differences, but coaching is just coaching, and running is running. So I don't really think there are a ton of differences. The sport's different. I coach marathoners mostly now, and trying to get them to do anything short is always a challenge. Whereas in high school, to get kids to do anything long was a challenge. So that's reversed.

Fair difference.

Yeah. But no, I mean, it's... Coaching is coaching in my book, and it's very similar. People have goals, and they want to meet their goals. And most runners are pretty ambitious. So I feel like a lot of times I'm holding reins, mostly, with the adults that I coach now, trying to pull them back a little bit.

Hold them back, keep them from overdoing it.

Yes.

I know that feeling.

Yep.

So, awesome. Well, we're excited to have you. I think one of the things I can say about you, Jen, is that you're a real student of the sport, not just as a fan, but also as a coach. And you take your craft in writing curriculum and workouts and schedules really, really seriously. And it's inspiring for me. So, glad you're on our team, for sure. What we're gonna do today is actually talk about building a training plan for a marathon. Actually got this as a question from a listener who said, hey, we'd love to have you talk about that. You talked a lot about macro cycles and how you structure big blocks of time in your training, but we haven't talked a lot about how we structure an individual cycle beyond talking about the nuances between different levels of training. And so that's what we're gonna do. We're gonna use our recently kicked off fall marathon curriculum as a backdrop for that. So for those that are training with us in Austin, Dallas or New York, then you'll recognize some of the things that we're talking about, but it also hopefully give you some context on why we structure the training the way we do. And so I'm excited about that. We'll get a little bit more into the details on how to build a plan and what's the science and art behind that. Before we go there though, I had a listener question that I actually wanted to answer with you, Jen. So I'm gonna read an email here, then we'll kind of answer a little bit about this question. From a listener from St. Louis, his name is Ben. He says, I'm a huge fan of the podcast and its various sub-podcasts. I am a 145 half marathoner and will just say a quote unquote slow marathoner. I'm also a 35 year old army vet, teacher and assistant girls track coach in St. Louis. Per the pod, I am working with a long term goal of qualifying for Boston by the time I turn 40. My plan, particularly as I have a five year old and a three year old is to focus on building a base, getting faster and knocking down from my half marathon times over the next two to three years before ramping up for another marathon. I'm currently running just under 30 miles a week in six days, which includes a long run, some easy recovery days, a tempo run that has sneakily become more of a pace run and intervals. I plan to increase mileage up to 40 miles per week for a few of the peak weeks in this cycle. Every runner is different. I totally get it. Generally, however, do you prescribe what Hal Higdon refers to as a pace run in your weekly workouts? I'm sure you know what that is, but he suggests a run each week at actual half marathon pace. My goal is that I just don't have the discipline not to do almost. Sorry, let me back up. My concern is that I just don't have the discipline not to almost do this with my tempo runs. Curious about your thoughts regarding more than two quality workouts per week, or how and if you see something like this making sense. So I'm gonna take that to you first, Jen.

Oh my goodness. That's a lot of information first. So, let's see, running 30 miles a week, 40 as a max. He's training for a half, I'm just trying, I didn't read the email, so.

Yes, he's training for a half. He's asking about basically doing a workout of you each week at actual half marathon pace. Which.

In addition to two other workouts.

In addition to his tempo runs, and it looks like another interval workout.

Right. That seems like a lot of intensity with a low volume. So I would probably, I think people should do pace work as a race gets closer. Maybe the last eight to 10 weeks of your training, doing pace work for whatever goal race you have. And I would probably schedule that in a long run to simulate more of what it's gonna feel like in the race. But not every week, probably every third week. And then I would also during that week, not do two other quality workouts. And I'd also be curious what his tempo paces are compared to what the race pace is, because those are usually very similar, depending on, I'm assuming it's probably closer to his 10K.

Yeah, tempo, at least in my vernacular as a coach, should be about half marathon effort.

Except if he's doing lactic threshold, then if he's a 145 half marathoner, then his is probably closer to 10K. Then I would wonder what the other quality workout is. If he said an interval workout, is that just speed work, 300s, or what exactly that looks like. But I would do pace work, just towards the end, and probably in the long runs, and not do two other speed workouts that week, going into that.

Yes, I completely agree with that. I mean, in my opinion here, Ben, if I were to jump on my podcast, Sobox, I would rather see you build your mileage to a higher level than add a third workout where you're running half marathon pace during the week. You're gonna get more bang for your buck out of that time spent, than you will be on running another run at half marathon pace. Because you risk, if you do that too early in the cycle, you risk actually overtraining and injury. And when you get to really needing that in the race specific phase, which we'll actually talk about later in this podcast, then it shouldn't be done every week, as you said, Jen, it could be done every third week inside a quality long run, where you're perhaps not doing your tempo run that week and instead doing that inside your long run to get that race specific work under your belt. But in advance of that, personally, I would rather see you get to a little higher mileage level running more easy runs to do so. And then maybe adding in that half marathon specific work in the final phase of your training right before your taper. We call that sort of the race specific phase, which is when you're for a half marathon, six to eight weeks out, so to speak, from your goal race, when you really want to dial into your pace. Before that, you've got to layer the foundation down, and until you do that, you're not really ready to do that kind of work. One thing that's interesting is that it seems like if you look at a lot of online schedules, they have at least two workouts a week. It's fairly common to see some sort of interval workout, which is more VO2 max oriented, and then a tempo run built into every single week. And that's not the case really in our schedules, as we'll talk about in a second, because we think really that much quality is too much for an athlete that's still building an aerobic foundation. That could be something that might make sense for a more experienced athlete who already has a strong aerobic foundation, but most people can get away with one quality workout a week, occasionally adding a second quality workout a week inside the long run in order to, as we just mentioned, stimulate those race conditions. So that's what I would say, Ben, is if you are gonna do a pace run, save that for a couple of quality work, a couple of long runs late in your session, in your season, and instead stick to, if you're following that Hal Higdon schedule, stick to the workouts that he prescribes, as is make sure you're running easy otherwise. And if I really had my preference, I would back off on some of those, either interval or tempo run workouts so that you can add volume safely early in the cycle in order to really maximize the aerobic foundation. And to me, that's especially true for somebody who has a marathon goal.

Right, so then I was gonna ask you, Chris, so he said that his goal is to eventually qualify for Boston, but he wants to spend a couple years developing his half. As a coach, would you want him to do marathons now, or would you be okay with him spending a couple years just focusing on the half, if his ultimate goal is to qualify for Boston?

That's a good question, Jen. I'd be curious, I like it, I like it. I'd be curious to get your perspective on this too. And here's my perspective. I could be convinced if somebody just said, hey, I've got a three and five year old, I'm not looking to do 20 mile runs right now. I'm trying to lay a foundation and running a fast half in order to set myself up for a BQ. I could be convinced that that plan makes sense because I think most people don't actually spend enough time working the half marathon if they're trying to qualify for Boston. They end up spending all their time cycle to cycle working the marathon, which actually limits potentially their long-term potential. And so, I could be convinced, and I don't know what, I mean, I guess if you're turning 40, your BQ is what, a 310 at that level? And so, if he said, hey, I want to try to figure out how to run a 128 half marathon over the next few years, then I can go up and be prepared to run a 310 marathon. I could be convinced with the caveat that Ben would be doing 18 mile long runs in his half marathon box. So yeah, you wouldn't be doing 20 milers, but you would be building that overall volume so that you're doing up to 16 to 18 mile long runs fairly regularly during that two to three year window, which would not only maximize your half marathon potential, but also when you go to the marathon, you're going to be primed and ready to make that leap up to 20 mile long runs, which isn't a big deal, right? If you've gotten to that point. So that would be my answer. What would you say?

So I agree with you, except that I would also add, and I'm sure you would add this too, but I think that to get better at the marathon, you also have to race marathons. And so-

This is true.

Yeah. And if you take someone that is just a great half marathoner, usually, they can transition to a marathon, but there are a lot of other mental challenges that come into play with the marathon, and also physical challenges. And so I agree about the 18-mile long runs for the half training schedule, but maybe not at first. Maybe if you're not used to that, you build up to that over the next couple of years. But I would also recommend racing marathons and knowing that it's gonna take some time and it's to be patient and don't expect to qualify just because you ran a half that says you should be able to qualify in a full. I think that's a mistake that people make.

Yeah. Yeah, and I mean, I think that's a great point. And if I had my preference, if I was gonna be prescriptive to Ben, I would say, let's try to do a couple of marathons over a three-year period, mixing in a bunch of halves as well. So it's not like you would have to be totally sold out for the marathon, but at least get a couple in over the three-year period that he describes so that when he does make that shift, he understands the associated challenges. And it sounds like he does already, but there are some things to work on, as you said there, that are different and unique and require practice. So there you go, Ben, thank you for sending in the question. I think that actually perfectly primes up this topic because a lot of those elements, we can actually come back to in our conversation. So we're going to talk about building a marathon plan here. And Jen, you were the primary architect of our fall plan this year. And one thing we like to do is definitely evolve our plans, but there are certain core elements that are in all of them. And if you want to go back to just core base training principles, you can listen to episode one if you haven't already, because that will give you some of those foundational things. So we're gonna talk less about the philosophy of training and more how you apply that philosophy in the context of a training block development. And so for this, and I'm just gonna use these dates as a reference point for people so that they can understand. We've got a bunch of people training for the Toronto Marathon October 20th. We started our training for that, the first week in May. And so if you look at our schedule that goes from that first week in May until October 20th, that's 25 weeks. It's a 25 week marathon plan. And I've mentioned this on a podcast recently about goal setting. When I was talking to James and we were talking about why people miss their goals. And part of the reason why is that they like to short circuit their blocks of training, particularly for the marathon, where people can think that in 12 to 16 weeks, they can put together a marathon plan. And we like something that would be more like 20 to 25 weeks so that you can properly build that foundation. So first question is, if you're thinking about those 25 weeks, how is it structured at the highest level? What are the phases that you're building into the plan to appropriately build to that peak in October?

So we start, well, I started, we started with a base phase. Our base phase, the cycle was six weeks long. Sometimes base phases can be shorter, four weeks. Sometimes they can even be eight weeks, just depends on how much time you have. During our base phase, we're doing workouts, but they're light, they're no paces involved with the workouts, which I think is great for runners. And it's an opportunity for runners to build mileage in a safe environment without a lot of intensity. Though there are still workouts, and we did challenge runners this time around with doing workouts without as many breaks, like with the straights and curves, that workout we changed this season, and normally we would take 400 meter jog recovery in between every six laps. And this time around, we did not do a jog recovery. But we're working back on strides and drills and a little bit of speed work, but again, nothing with pace. Just slowly building our mileage and throwing in some work, but not a lot of work.

Effort-based workouts.

I love effort-based workouts.

Yes. I kind of, I don't know if you've used this term, but I have for this phase, which I actually like to call it the priming phase more than I call it a base phase. Partially because in a traditional base phase-

You don't do any of that.

In a traditional base phase, old school style, you just do only easy running primarily to build mileage. And what we've learned through the years and various coaches have as well is that you really need some quality, effort-based quality work in there early on to prime the muscles and the aerobic system for the work that will come, so that when you do start adding in more intense workouts, the system isn't completely shocked.

Right. I haven't used that term, but I like it. I might use it now.

So the priming phase, AKA the base phase, you said six weeks.

Yeah, in this cycle, we're using six weeks, yep.

And then after that, what's next?

So after that, I like to call the next phase a strength phase, but you can also call it a fundamental phase, which is what I called it in our syllabus. And so in this phase, you can... This is when you introduce workouts with paces. This is when you introduce tempo runs or what I like to call lactic threshold runs and some other workouts. We have some new ones this phase, but you can... You have a lot of different workouts that you can kind of add in to this phase because you can work a lot of different energy systems during this phase. And just getting runners ready for not only the physical demands of what they're going to be racing in a marathon, but also the mental demands as well.

How long is that?

In this phase, this training cycle, it is seven weeks. But it can be longer or shorter.

Yeah, seven, eight weeks is typical. The strength phase, and I think that word is commonly misunderstood in this context. Some people think of body strength or muscular strength when you use that word. And really what we're talking about here is aerobic strength, which another word I like to use for that is endurance, or basically your ability to sustain less intense paces for longer and longer periods of time. So we're trying to build this endurance base what you might see. And there's gonna be some leg strength components because often these phases incorporate hill work. But what you're gonna see in this phase is workouts that are typically either have hills involved or are slightly lower intensity, but longer intervals with shorter rest, so that you can work on that ability to sustain those comfortably hard efforts for longer and longer periods of time, so that when we go into the next phase, you're ready to build speed and race-specific pacing. So that's our strength phase, seven, eight weeks to follow, and then what do we have after that?

Our race-specific phase. So this phase depends on what your goal race is. So if it's a half marathon, like we talked about before, then you would be adding in more half marathon prep work. For this training cycle, we're focusing on the marathon, so we have more marathon-paced work, but we also keep in the speed, we keep in foundations that you need in racing in general, and to be fit as an overall runner. We also add in race preps or long-run workouts into this phase as well. So the workouts just get a little bit more intense during this phase.

So you've got more pure speed, you've also got more race-specific work. Those are the two hallmarks of quality work in this phase of training. And also, as you said, we'll be adding in our long-run workouts primarily here. Some will start a little bit before that, but primarily this is where you're actually doing marathon pace work inside your long-run or variations of that. How long is this phase?

This phase, well, because we wrote a program for so many different marathons, but if we were looking at just the October 20th race, then this phase would be eight weeks.

Yep. So another typically seven, eight weeks, and then you have the last phase of training, which I think is fairly common for people to hear about, which is that taper phase, where you cut down the volume a little bit, cut down the intensity a little bit, prep the body for your actual race day, which for marathoners is typically a three-week period of time. Some people like a little bit shorter personally, two weeks is my favorite as an individual athlete. But I think most people, a three-week taper is most appropriate for the marathon. Another word for that taper phase that I like to use is peaking phase, which sort of implies that it's a more positive, I think, framing of this phase of work, which can be a little bit maddening when you start to cut back on things.

Well, peaking is, that's what we used in track and field and in college. And then, when you come into marathon training, everyone says taper, but I always called it peaking as well.

Yeah. So, that's three weeks at the end. So, we're looking at, just to summarize, six weeks of base building, seven weeks of strength, eight weeks of race-specific work, and then a three-week taper. If I'm doing my math right, I think that came out to...

I think yours is, I think it's supposed to be 24 weeks.

24 weeks instead of 25. We were close. I was estimating slightly wrong at the beginning. So, a 24-week cycle. Now, I think a lot of people are gonna listen here and say, that's crazy, that's six months of time. How can I train for a marathon for six months? I've got life, I've got other things to do. Like, this is nuts. What would you say to that?

Well, I would say that the marathon is an extremely challenging race, and if you have a goal for it and you wanna do well, then you need to put in the time and the consistent work. However, with doing a training schedule that is this long, there are opportunities for if you get sick or if life happens or if you travel, that's not really a problem because you've been doing work and then you're gonna do some more work afterwards, right? So we build into the schedule many 20 plus mile long runs so that if you miss one, it's not a big deal. If you miss one workout, it's okay. And so I think you need six months if you wanna do well, but I also think that there's some flexibility in there. And if you've been running and you have been consistent with your training and you wanna do a shorter build, that's absolutely possible.

You're talking about for somebody who has a consistently, relatively consistently high mileage year round and then.

So like a team rogue athlete for me, I can do much shorter build.

Because they could go into a race specific phase more quickly because they've already got that foundation. But that foundation is so important. It's just like to use a building analogy, if you build a house and you don't build the foundation, the house is gonna fall apart. And the same is true with any training program. You gotta build that foundation. We talk about it around here is you have to be fit enough to train basically. And so that initial period of six weeks plus the strength, so about 13 weeks is getting you fit enough to train so that when you do get into that race specific work, your body's actually ready to receive it so that you can then reach your highest potential, the house will go higher. There will be more stories if you have the proper foundation. And go ahead.

I just want to say one thing, that when I was coaching high school runners, the season was broken up into two, into track season and cross country season. But those kids would train for six months for one race, just like marathoners, and even though it was a much shorter race. So there's, I mean, there are runners that train for a mile or a 5, 000 meter race, and they will train for six months to prepare for that race, even though it's much shorter.

Yeah. Now the other difference there is they're having also races in between, which we can talk about too here, which there's obviously always opportunity to build in some prep races as you go, so that you have some checkpoints along the way to see where you are. But let's get to that in a second. I want to talk about our three week cycles. So the other thing we do within the context of our program is we have two up weeks and then a down week. So we go through that basically the entire time until you get to the taper phase when you are basically just gradually shifting down. Why three week cycles and then kind of how does that look like?

Well, why three week cycles? It's a nice happy medium. Some coaches will do a four week cycle and some will do a two week cycle. I personally like three weeks because I think that it works for the majority of people. Having two up weeks and then allowing your body to have a recovery week every third week. That third week is usually when your body is starting to feel the effects from the two weeks before. And so it's a good time for mental and physical, for your body to just have a kind of, I call it a regeneration week for your body to kind of regenerate and recoup and also reap the benefits of the two previous hard weeks. We usually, it takes about two weeks for your body to feel effects from workouts. So that's why we do a three week cycle.

Yeah, 10 days to two weeks to incorporate the work. And so we're doing two up weeks. I also like the fact that it actually simulates a 10 day cycle, which a lot of elite athletes will use. Basically, but it kind of crams it into the context of our weekly work weeks, which actually makes it work. So you're doing basically two 10 day cycles, but structured in a way that allows you to actually work during the week and do your long runs on the weekend. So two up weeks and then a down week. A down week is typically about 10 to 20% lower in overall volume. You're cutting back primarily your long run, a few runs during the week. You're still doing workouts during those down weeks. And oftentimes we like to incorporate some shorter, faster work during those down weeks in order to keep the system turned on and the legs and muscles primed for the up weeks to come. But it's an important part of the stress rest cycle because you're basically allowing your body to recover from that work so that when you go back to your up weeks, you've actually incorporated your fitness and can build from there. One thing, though, that's funny to me about down weeks is to me, they often feel the shittiest. Everybody's always wondering, like, I feel terrible. My mileage is lower. What's happening? And it's like your body's recovering, and so that's why you feel terrible. It's sort of like when you feel terrible in a marathon taper. It's the same kind of concept. The body's basically exhaling, breathing out, incorporating the work that you've done, and it's not gonna feel great when you do that. And so sometimes those down weeks feel worse than the up weeks.

Yes, but that's why we keep nd the speed work too, is to just kind of keep the legs awake and keep you feeling fresh so you don't get completely flat going in, yeah.

So now I wanna talk about long runs. And again, we're talking about the marathon here. So obviously we're building up to 20 plus mile long runs. When you're writing a schedule that goes for 24, 25 weeks, how do you build a long run plan?

Well, here at Rogue, we have three different levels for our long runs. So we have a beginner, we have an intermediate, and we have an advanced. And that's not including the Team Rogue groups. And so for a beginner, I think about if they've never done a marathon, and this is their very first time to train for a marathon, we're gonna build them a lot slower as far as, and we have plenty of time, which is great. And we can allow for their body to adapt to the mileage slowly. Whereas an intermediate runner and an advanced runner, we can build them a lot faster. We can get them going into the long runs without such a gradual build. So our beginners and our long runs, they'll do, there's two 20-mileers, 20 to 22-mileers on the schedule, but that's mainly if they miss one, or if one goes like poop, then they can come back and have another one and still feel good before their race. And then our intermediate, they're gonna have more, so usually I think it's four is what we have in there, and then for our advanced, it's anywhere between five and six of the 20s, 20-plus-mile long runs. But again, it builds gradually for the beginner. It builds a little bit, there's a little bit more rigor in the intermediate and a lot more rigor in the advanced, because we're just assuming that the advanced is someone who's been doing marathons for a while. Advanced and beginner and intermediate has nothing to do with pace, by the way.

It's more about experience. So, two long runs, two 20-plus-mileers for that level one beginner, four for intermediate, potentially more than five or six for the advanced athlete. Oftentimes, I get the comment that that's a lot when I have people joining our groups. And it's definitely more than you might see on a program that you pull off the Internet. Why do we believe in so many 20-mileers?

Well, you have to train for what the race is going to ask of you. And if you've, I don't know, I've done not as many marathons as you, Chris, but I feel a lot better and more prepared going into a marathon when I've done a lot of 20-mileers. Because it prepares me for what I'm going to experience in the race, that quad fatigue, the dead legs, all of those things that you feel you need to prepare for. And then of course, there's also the scientific neuromuscular, all of the fun stuff. But I just think of what we would need to be prepared for the race.

As Bill Squires says, the long run puts the tiger in the cat. And that's what we're trying to do with these 20-mileers. And when you build the actual schedules, regardless of which level we're talking about, are you working backwards from race day?

Always.

Yeah, so you're working backwards. You write down your race day, then you're kind of working backwards from there. You've got your taper weeks, which you'll have a couple of those. Usually we like to do eight to 12 miles a week out. 14 to 16, two weeks out. And then typically your last 20-mile run, three weeks out if you're following a three-week taper. And then basically you back up from there, back to your starting point, depending on how long you're building this cycle. And because again, we've got a 24-week cycle here, that's plenty of time to build. Some of the rules of thumb that I like to use when I'm building long-run plans, because what I'll typically do is I'll start from the end and kind of build up from there, get all my 20-milers written down, and then I'll go back to the beginning and sort of meet the two in the middle a little bit, just to make sure that it seems to make sense from both perspectives. Both you're getting enough work at the end, but then you're also building gradually enough from the beginning. And a couple of rules of thumb that I like to do. One is that, especially for somebody who is typically not a marathon athlete, I like to build by a mile a week initially, or no more than a mile a week initially, sometimes keeping the same distance for a couple of weeks, up to about 10 miles. Once you get to 10 miles, then I feel more comfortable jumping by chunks of two.

That's what I do too.

Where you'll go 10, maybe up to 12, up to 14, et cetera, wanting to make sure that you're getting that athlete comfortable with every step of the way. You never want to jump a long run by more than two miles because you don't have that foundation.

Right, and I agree 100%.

What else do you look at when you're building these long run plans? What else do you look at?

I look at...

Or consider.

I know, where I'm going to put the workouts.

Okay, so let's talk about that. And that's again something that is a hallmark of our programming, where we're adding in long run pace work or pace work inside of our long runs. We call them race preps, basically helping you prepare for race day by doing some race specific pacing inside the long run. How do those typically fall?

So it depends with each different block, but I like the race preps to make sure that I'm working maybe a different energy system than we've already worked that week so that we're not working the same system over and over again, and we're kind of having some variety with what we're working. And then I always look at what is, again, what is an athlete gonna go through during a marathon at different stages, and then how can we best prepare them with different workouts that simulate those same feelings? So, you know, just recently, my team did a workout this weekend, the ones that are training for a September race. And they did kind of the five sets of 10 minutes at aerobic threshold and then 10 minutes at an easy pace. And they all said, oh, the aerobic threshold was so easy, but the easy part was so hard because their legs started to really, because I give them a lot of rest, right? A lot of jogging recovery. And that's when everything kind of sets in. And so that to me is the simulator, is those last easy parts of their workout where their legs just feel really heavy and sluggish, and then they have to like get up and go again. So that's, I'm usually thinking through, what is the race gonna ask, whether it's Austin or Toronto? And then how can we best prepare them with a long run, a race simulator?

Yep, and we'll typically do our last simulator three weeks out, sometimes four weeks out, depending on how the schedule falls from race day, so that you have that final simulator as close as possible while still allowing a taper to race day. And then we'll do three to four of these race preps throughout a season. Typically, this is only for your intermediate and advanced athletes, beginners. It's really just all about covering the distance, so doing all of those long runs at easy paces. And those race prep workouts will be typically three weeks apart, so that you have plenty of opportunity to recover between them.

And we give multiples because, I mean, one, you get the physiological benefit and the mental benefit, but also if one goes to shit, then you still have another one or a previous one that you can gain confidence from going into your race. We also have long run closes, which are probably the old school way of just running with a group and getting faster as you go. But we prescribe it in our long runs to make sure everybody practices finishing fast.

A progression at the end. How long typically do you recommend on the closes?

So four miles for marathons, three for half marathoners.

Three or four mile close, which is just a progressive in control finish where you're finishing a little faster than easy pace, but doing it in a way that you don't beat yourself up and feel completely taxed at the end. And in this prep, as I'm looking at the schedule, we have long run race preps three, six, and nine weeks out from Toronto. And then we've got some closes built in around that as well, just to make sure that we're finishing fast and developing that nose for the finish line that we like to see in our athletes. And again, that's primarily for those intermediate or advanced athletes, whereas beginners, we just want you covering the distance. Okay, so that's long run schedule. The next thing I wanted to talk about is weekly structure, how we structure our weekly schedule. And typically for marathoners, we're recommending five to six days per week of running with one or two off days, depending on what your starting point is.

Yes.

But how is each day structured in a week? What are the purposes of each day? How does it fit together across a seven day schedule?

So if you're doing your quality workouts on a Tuesday, then we have our schedule set up to where Monday is an easy day. If you're going to run, we have up to a certain amount of mileage, but we don't tell you exactly how much to run. We kind of leave that up to the runner, the individual. We just have a max of what they would want to run on that Monday. So an easy day. And then Tuesday would be their quality day. Wednesday would be a recovery day to recover from the quality workout. So it's a little bit lower mileage if they're going to run. Or again, they could take that as an off day if they needed to. A day to do maybe the elliptical or aqua jogging or swimming, whatever they want to do. And then Thursday, we have our medium long run, which builds just like our long run schedule builds. And that is a run that is in between your kind of Monday easy run and then your long run. So it builds as a schedule. It gets up to anywhere between eight to 12 miles. You'll see some schedules that use a medium long run that have longer medium long runs depending on the mileage. So ours is pretty medium. I mean, I think it's kind of in the in-between stage of what a medium long run is. And then Friday is an off day, Saturday is a long run, and Sunday is a recovery. You can't always switch that Friday. If you are a runner that likes to run on Fridays, then you could switch your Monday with your Friday to have some flexibility there.

And that's just one example. We obviously have differently structured weeks depending on when the groups might meet. But a key hallmark there is only one quality workout, which some people would call that a speed workout, a week. And that workout might look very differently depending on the day. Sometimes it's hills, sometimes it's far legs, sometimes it's more tempo-oriented work, sometimes it's going to the track. It has a lot of variety to it depending on the phase, but we believe that one quality workout for most athletes can actually get the job done. And we would rather, instead of doing two quality workouts a week, for people actually invest time in that medium long run. I personally call the medium long run the unsung hero of marathon training because it's that day that nobody really wants to do. But it's, and it's, in my world, for athletes I coach, I say if you're a marathoner who wants to get the most out of the marathon, you should be doing eight to 10 miles at least for the medium long run. Easy paces on another day, at least a couple of days away from your quality workout. For me, I coach on Wednesday morning, so my group typically will do their medium long run on Mondays. That's the unsung hero of marathon training because you're getting that easy aerobic work, that long, slow distance as Arthur Lidyard called it in order to build that aerobic foundation so that you can run fast when it's time. And then, you know, so that's important. The recovery day's also important.

Very important.

Because that's, as Marilyn, who came on the show, says, motion is lotion. And so those days are all about motion to get the blood flowing, to kickstart that recovery process. Sometimes when people feel sore after a speed workout or after a long run, they say to me, well, I shouldn't run today, I feel too sore.

You should totally run, just go really easy.

To me, it's actually the opposite. The more sore you are, the more you need it.

I know.

And certainly you always need it, but sore is actually a sign that you need that easy movement in order to recover and get the blood flowing back to your muscles so that they can heal and prepare you for that next hard day. I personally, as a coach, see one of the most common injury patterns coming from when people are doing quality workouts and then long runs without an easy recovery day in between. It's that hard session to hard session with no active rest that really gets people a lot of the time, especially with those soft tissue injuries. So gotta have your recovery days. And then that other easy day you mentioned, in this case on Monday, it could also be a cross training day. If somebody's looking to do fewer running days, five running days a week could be a cross training day. We were doing some sort of other easy aerobic activity. Could also be another off day for some, if you can only manage five days a week. But that five or six day week schedule is important. There are programs out there that have less than that for marathons, including the famous Runners World Run Less Run Faster program, which I think has a three day a week schedule, which is really beyond absurd if you want to get the most out of your body and try to run your fastest for a marathon. But quickly comment on that.

On the three day a week? Well, my rule of thumb is that in running, to be a better runner, you have to run, right? It's a contact sport, and it requires contact with the ground. And if you wanted to learn how to play the piano, you wouldn't play the piano twice a week. You would want to play the piano multiple times, if not every day. I'm not saying that you have to run every day, but I do think that having that contact with the ground and also having the stimulus and all of the benefits, neuromuscular benefits that come with actually doing the sport are incredibly beneficial, especially if you're gonna be training for a marathon. If you want to have your best marathon. I do coach people that only run three days a week. I will say that. I have team Rogue athletes that just cannot commit to doing more than three days. But I also will tell you that they are very talented and they could be so much faster if they ran more.

They're not maximizing their potential.

No, they're not.

So let's just talk a little bit about ranges for each of those days, just to kind of give people context for that. For that easy day on Monday, again, using that Tuesday quality schedule, just as an example, you're building that Monday run up in those cases to up to six or seven miles for that easy day Monday. Typically, our Tuesday quality workouts are gonna be anywhere from six to eight miles, depending on the workout and the part of the schedule that we're in. Those recovery days could be anywhere from three to six miles, typically, in our base schedule. That medium long run, eight to 12 for marathoners is what we like to get people up to. And then, of course, the long run is gonna be up to 22 miles in most of our schedules. And then we have, again, the Sunday recovery day, which is, again, a three to six mile day. And so that's pretty typical. Now, when you're building those days across the schedule, because obviously you're not gonna start out at an eight to 12 mile medium long run, how do you think about the build of those days within the overall schedule?

So, just the same way I do as the long run. So a very gradual, during the base phase, that's when we're building up. So, for instance, on Monday, you could start the first two weeks at four miles, the next two weeks at five, and then six. And so you would gradually build it just like you would with your long run schedule. Same thing for the medium long run. We have a range, so it would be four to six for the first couple weeks, and then five to seven for the next couple of weeks. And then six to eight. And then we don't get until about week 13 to the eight to 12 range, even week 15. So because we also have the down weeks, and we don't want to exclude those because they're really important. So every down week, we also will drop the mileage and those other days of running, just like we would with our long run and our quality run.

One thing, though, that is unique about what we do here with this, especially given the length of our schedules, is that people are getting to their peak mileage potentially 10 weeks out, nine, 10 weeks out from their race day. Whereas if you look a lot of online schedules, people hit that peak mileage maybe three or four weeks out from race day. And that's again, a hallmark of what we're doing, which is that we're giving you that time to build that aerobic foundation, so that when the workouts get most intense, you've already built your mileage to the level it's gonna sustain versus continuing to try to build your mileage while the quality work is getting its most intense. And that's when you start to get too many variables at play, which can cause injury late in the cycle. So talk a little bit about the rationale there.

Sometimes, Chris, when you say something and you already say the answers, it's really- Yeah, so we-

Yes, Chris, I agree.

Yes, Chris, you are correct. No, yeah, we build up the mileage so that during the last phase, your race-specific phase, which is your most intense phase because of those long-run workouts and because the long runs are really increasing and distancing, you're doing more 20-milers or you're at 20. We want the mileage. We want the weekday schedule to not be something where you're also increasing at the same time. You never want to increase too much mileage and too much intensity, and you definitely don't want to increase at the same time too much of those together. So we try to be very mindful, and because we have a long time, we can easily do that with this type of schedule. Yeah, so like what Chris said.

So the other rule of thumb you often hear in the context of these schedule builds is the 10% rule. Never increase mileage by more than 10%. What do you think about that?

So I think it depends. If I have a runner who's coming back from an injury, and they're starting with 10 miles a week, I can quickly move them back up to where they were before without it being a 10% rule. However, with some of my Team Rogue athletes, I actually do less than 10%, so we do sometimes a 5% or a 3%, depending on how high their mileage is. And I also don't... If someone had run, let's say, 65 miles a week the last training block, which was, let's say, a 20-week block, then this next training block, I probably wouldn't increase them more than 10% over each block, so over each big cycle.

So 10% from week to week, as well as not increasing overall mileage by more than 10%, which I think... I do think that rule can be flexed a little bit for athletes that start from a lower base. If you've been doing 30 miles a week in a previous cycle, and 10% of that is only 3 miles, so taking you to maybe 40 miles a week might actually be okay if you do it the right way. The other thing I think to mention here is that we can write these schedules, or you can write your own schedule at home for building your mileage, but it doesn't preclude listening to your body and actually adapting as you go. I think some people become a slave to the build in a sense that if the schedule says it, they're going to do it no matter how they feel, and then they end up running themselves into the ground. And so that's something else to pay attention to. If you're working on a schedule at home, or if you're following another build schedule from somewhere else, just don't forget to listen to your body. And if your body says you're not ready to take that next jump, whether it be in weekly mileage or in your long run distance, just don't do it. It's better to get to the start line healthy than it is to do too much too soon and end up on the sideline.

I agree.

Okay, so that's sort of weekly schedule. Let's talk a little bit about workouts throughout the cycle, just to give people some examples. And we mentioned already in that base phase or priming phase, some straights and curves that we're doing, some effort-based work. So let's go to the next phase, strength. And this week, we actually have on the schedule a workout that you've stolen from your college coach. We're calling it the Lumberjack Twist. And so give us a little taste. This is a workout we're doing in the strength phase. I really like this one, by the way. And we call it the Lumberjack Twist because you went to... Stephen F. Austin here in... In Texas. We were the Lumberjacks. And their mascot was the Lumberjacks taken from your college coach. So talk about the Lumberjack Twist as an example.

Okay. So in this particular workout, we're going to have hills, which again, we talked about previously. We like to touch hills whenever we're in the strength phase. And so we're going to start with some hill sprints. This could be anywhere between four and six or seven hill sprints. You could do up to eight hill sprints if you wanted to. To really fatigue the legs. Also, I like hill sprints because to me, they're like a VO2 max workout in disguise. They get your heart rate up. They make your legs tired, and they're just a speed workout in disguise. So we start with that, and then we go into aerobic threshold work, which to me is one of the most important types of workouts a marathoner can do. Aerobic threshold is how fast you can run all out for two hours. So for some runners, that's going to be their half marathon pace, and for other runners, it could be their 30K race pace. So we'll do some amount of minutes of aerobic threshold work. I think we have about 15 minutes of work in there, and then we go back and we finish with hill sprints again. And then we come back three weeks later, we'll do this workout again, and this time we'll finish with another aerobic threshold section.

What are we trying to do with this? What's the purpose?

What's the purpose? Well, every purpose of every workout is to prepare you for your race, right? So this purpose of this workout is to fatigue the legs and then go into something, which is a control. So aerobic threshold is a controlled push. I like to think of it as a steady-ish effort. So you're very controlled in what you're doing. You're very relaxed, but you're still pushing the pace. You're still working. And so that's... Hopefully, if we do this correctly, we're tired a little bit when we get to that, so that we can focus on that mental push, the... Help. I'm losing my words here, Chris.

So you can focus on finding that rhythm.

Focus on finding your rhythm. Thank you. And then we'll come back to the hills, which if you ever, you know, any race that you do, at the end, it's hard. Your legs are tired. You've been pushing, and now you're gonna have to finish with something even harder, which is like the last 5K of your marathon or the last 5K of your half. And we're gonna push again. We're doing hill sprints, so we're looking at popping up those hills and using good form and driving our legs and all of that good stuff. I can't talk anymore.

I love it. But yeah, the hills are really about fatigue, generating that fatigue, so then you have to work a little bit harder on that aerobic threshold or steady effort work, which is another word I like to use for it, so that you can have to practice holding that effort under fatigue like you do in a marathon. Other workouts that we'll do in this phase, lactate threshold is another thing we like to hit, which is basically the pace or effort you can hold for an hour, so it's a little bit faster than aerobic threshold. It's more like a tempo-ish kind of effort, maybe a little faster than that, depending on the runner. But it's all about in this phase that aerobic strength or those sustained efforts with shorter rest. And then we go into the next phase, that race-specific phase. Let's pull an example from there. How about the Dillinger? This is a new workout to the Rogue World, so I'm excited to talk about it.

Okay. Hold on. So I just, I got this workout. Well, I kind of adapted it from Bill Dillinger's book. And now I can't remember the name of the book, but I have it. It's really old.

Famous University of Oregon coach.

Yes. And he coached Prefontaine.

Steve Prefontaine there, as well as Bowerman.

Yes.

So.

But Dillinger was really, he was, I think, more hands on at that time than Bowerman was with the athletes. And my college coach at SFA went to University of Oregon, and she met Bill Dillinger. And I love this story. And I'm sorry, Chris, I have to tell it. So when she came back from meeting him, all of a sudden we had all these tempos on our schedule for cross country season. And they were long. They were like five-mile tempos, and I had never done anything like that. And so we asked her, we said, why are we doing all these tempo runs? And she said, well, it's the one workout that Bill Dillinger said, you couldn't keep up with pre-on. It was a workout you can't cheat. It was, you can't cheat doing a tempo run.

Right, for that long, especially.

Yeah, absolutely. So anyway, the Dillinger workout is basically we're doing gear changing. So we're alternating between different gears. It's also, I think he calls it in the book a surging drill, is what he actually calls the workout. So I have to actually look it up because I don't have it memorized. I wish I did. Why don't you talk about it, Chris, and I'll look it up.

So it's an in-and-out workout, which is something that is a hallmark of our training, certainly something we've done before. So this is not new to our world. This specific version of it is new. But what you're trying to accomplish with these in-and-out workouts is alternating between typically a faster pace with a pace that's closer to race pace, which helps you not only learn to recover, quote-unquote, recover at or near your race pace, but also basically learn to get back into that rhythm. So learn that rhythm so that if something happens in a race, you slow down at a water stop, you know, somebody runs in front of you and you have to adjust your pace, then you're able to kind of dial back in easily. So what's the delinger now that you've looked it up?

Yeah, thank you. So you start off... I'll just do the intermediate workout because that's kind of in between the beginner and the advanced. So you start off with 800 meters at 10K pace, and then you go right into 2 miles at marathon goal pace, then back down to 800 meters at 5K pace, and then another 2 miles at marathon pace, and then you finish with the 800 meters at 5K pace. And so the 800 meters at 10K, it's almost like the start of your marathon, when you have all this nervous energy, and you're all excited, and you go out a little bit fast, and then you've got to dial it back, and you get back into your rhythm of your marathon pace. But then like Chris said, something goes wrong, or maybe you have hills in your race, and you've got to push up the hill, and it gets your heart rate up a little bit higher than you'd like. So we've got back down at 5K pace, which is really hard for a marathoner to go from marathon to 5K, then back to marathon, then finishing back up at 5K, which I think is the kicker of the workout, because at that point, you've already done five miles of work. It's a continuous workout, so there's technically not a break, which makes it mentally very challenging. And then you've got to finish with something at 5K pace, which probably will feel like all-out effort at that point.

Yeah, so you're working on your clothes, too, and your ability to find that finish line, as we said earlier. So that's a workout that will include late in that race-specific work, that race-specific phase. We also have the Michigan workout in that phase, which we've talked about before. We've got shorter track workouts. We've got a track ladder.

We also have a two-mile progression workout as well, which is another... Again, we're practicing... We want to practice the way we want to race.

You're doing two-mile reps in cut-down fashion, getting a little bit faster as you go. And again, that's only inside one quality workout each week, and if you're layering this cake appropriately, as well as building the overall mileage with that medium-long run and that long run, we believe that that's your best path to getting to your peak potential for a marathon. Okay, let's talk about... Since we mentioned it earlier, let's talk about prep races and where those typically fit. Now, for us here in Texas training for an October 20th marathon, it's a little bit challenging because it gets too damn hot in Texas to have anything like a half marathon in the window that would set up well for an October 20th race. When do you like to see prep races for a marathon, and what do you like to see there?

So I actually like any distance because I feel like all race experience helps you in a marathon. So even if it's as short as a 5K, if that's all we have available, then that's what I would recommend runners to do. Because I think just the nervousness, the energy that you're going to get from doing a 5K race and also the pain of the 5K, even though it's very different than a marathon, it's still having to get to an area in your body where you don't want to go. It's uncomfortable. And so practicing getting uncomfortable is always good. And so to me, it's any distance. We don't have a lot of half marathons in August. I would like, I mean, ideally, I think doing a half marathon or a 10K, a half marathon probably six weeks out, a 10K two to four weeks out. But you could always do a 5K, and those are also good to do. So I don't want to discount those.

Yeah, well, I agree. I mean, it makes you suffer and work on the mental side in whatever race format it comes. I'm with you, though. I like a half prep race four to six weeks out. Sometimes a little longer is okay. A 10K two to three weeks out, as you said, if it's there. And obviously, you have to then adjust your long run schedule a little bit around that so you don't miss those 20 milers. And but as you say, in this case, in our world, 5Ks or for us, Zilka Relays, which is a two and a half mile times four, 10 mile total team relay here in Austin is a perfect prep race that falls on September 6th this year, which is about six weeks out from Toronto. And that is a unique form of suffering that's going to prepare you on a September 6th Friday evening to actually suffer in the longer race a little bit better. So yes, you're right. You can make it a 5K. I do like to see some form of prep race before, and if you can't find the perfect half, which is a great distance for a marathon prep, then finding that 5K or 10K that can at least help you practice the mental side of the game in whatever format race you can find, it can be really, really helpful.

I agree. When I did my first marathon, my mom made me do the distance challenge because she said you have to practice all the races leading up to the marathon because that's how you'll go into the race prepared. So practicing your nutrition and what you're going to wear and your shoes and being nervous and going to the porta potty and all those things, it really made a big difference for me.

One thing I do want to mention though on the flip side is there are people that I think want to prep race too much, and that can be a little bit dangerous, especially for marathon training because you don't want to miss those key long run opportunities. So you have to be careful not to overdo it. But for those that have a race they want to do, there are ways to potentially work that in without making it an all out race. So you could, if you want to do a half that, you know, I've had people say, this is my hometown half. I'm going home to do it. I want to do it. It's like, okay, fine. You're going to do 13 miles though, and then have a 20 mile day because you're going to add four miles before and three miles after.

You can also do a double. There's a lot of different ways to get it.

So you can work it different ways. You can also treat the race as what I like to call a training race where you're maybe not going all out, but you're using it like a long run workout of sorts, trying to target specific paces that might be slower than your half marathon race pace in order to prepare for that race to come. But you just want to make sure, I mean, it comes back to the question that we ask all the time around here, around Rogue, which is what does the race require? And if you have a big marathon with a big goal, you want to make sure that the things you're doing leading up to that will actually benefit you for that race versus take away from it. And I think sometimes we will get sucked into this race bug that might cause them to do some things that aren't quite optimal for their goal race.

No, I agree. I agree. I agree 100%. I think some people probably race a lot more than they should if they have a big A race goal. You have to definitely plan accordingly, and hopefully you have a coach that can help you and you're listening to your coach. Because usually they can see the bigger picture whenever, as an athlete, we can only see what's right in front of us or what we want to do. And even as myself as a coach, it helps to have someone else looking at my calendar to figure out what I'm supposed to be doing.

So one thing I want to talk about is nutrition, long run nutrition especially. Before we get there, in thinking about the scheduling structure, have we missed anything in the machinations in your brain as to building one of these? Obviously there's a lot more work, and we're not hitting every little detail because we've got only an hour and change to talk about it. But any other big concepts that we're missing?

No, the only thing I would say about the taper is I think it's important to note that we're not asking runners to take a bunch of extra days off during the taper. We still want them to continue with the frequency, the number of days that they would run normally per week, because there's a lot of benefit to that, as opposed to cutting mileage by just cutting out days. So I would, yeah.

Keep all those days. Keep your routine. It helps your body stay sane, and you stay sane mentally. My general taper rule now is not really related to percentage of mileage. I tell people to back off one mile per run per week during their taper, whether they're doing a three-week taper or a two-week taper. But keep all those days and do a minimum of three miles. So that's my general rule of thumb. Okay, so let's talk about nutrition, long-run nutrition. At what point in the schedule would you tell a marathoner to start playing with that, experimenting, if they need to figure out what works for them during a race?

So I would actually, not this upcoming week, right now we're in a down week, but next week when this comes out, we will not be in a down week. And it will be July 1st. And the long runs for our runners are going to be between 12 and 16 miles that week. And if they're later marathoners, it will be 10 to 16. I would say at this point, runners should be focused on practicing their long run nutrition routine of what they're going to do on race day. And so we're about...

Nine weeks in.

Nine weeks in, yep.

Yeah, the rule of thumb I give is when your long run gets over two hours, it's time to start worrying about that, which should be about correlating to those mileage levels. Before that, no need to worry about it. You want to make sure your body can actually burn its own fuel efficiently first, and then you can start adding it in. But if you're doing a 24, 25 week schedule, about nine or 10 weeks in is about right, assuming you don't know what works for you. For those that do know, they could perhaps wait a little bit longer.

Yeah.

All right. That, I think, covers my questions, Jen.

That was so easy.

Well, right. It's like I just threw a softball right down the middle of the plate. You hit it out of the park because this is what you do.

It's what I love.

So one question I have for you, though, if someone other than obviously Training With Us, as we wrap this up, if somebody was looking for a schedule, a program, other than Training With Us either in person or in our virtual podcast group, are there better resources that you found for creating a schedule or following a schedule out there online?

Yes, I think so. Not better than what we do, but I think that there are a few that I like more than others. So I like advanced marathoning if you're an advanced runner. I think they have schedules for 50 miles a week all the way up to over 80 miles a week.

Pete Fitzinger's book, really good book. Probably my favorite marathon training book.

The first edition that he came out with did not have long run workouts, and then his second edition did. But I trained for my first marathon with his first edition, and then I ended up getting his second edition later just because it was so much fun to read. And then I also like Jack Daniels. I think he's on his third edition now, but I think his stuff is also really good.

Jack Daniels Running Formula. Also, those are both books, but have great schedules in them.

Schedules in them, yeah. And I think just being flexible, too. Knowing that the schedule that's written needs to also work with your life. So when you switch up days around, just keeping in mind that why is that run on that day, and then where to place it. So that I think is the tricky part of not having a coach and not having someone help you with your training.

Yeah, but if you've listened to enough of these podcasts, hopefully you're starting to figure it out that you can take ownership and make those adjustments if you follow the rules.

Mm-hmm.

Well, awesome, Jen. Thanks so much for joining me. Thanks also for all you do here in the Rogue community. It's been a real pleasure having you on.

Thank you, Chris.

And if you have questions for anybody out there, send us an email, chris at roguerunning.com. If you have questions and you're trying to build your own schedule, we'd love to answer those based on today's content. Otherwise, we will wrap this up. This has been episode 137 of the Running Rogue podcast. You can check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Instagram, Twitter or Facebook at Rogue Running. Until next time, we will talk to you soon.