Hey, everybody, welcome to episode 407 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung, joined virtually today by James Dodds, who is in another state. So we're not we're not in our cool set up. I'm sitting here in front of the green screen. If you're checking this out on YouTube, James is in Arizona, I believe. Right.

Yes. And I'm learning to, I guess, adapt to the heat. You know, they talk about a different kind of heat. Seriously. And I've heard the dry heat jokes and like ours with heat versus humidity. And I will say for running heat with humidity is nasty. But yeah, about three or four o'clock in the afternoon here, they win the air. Anyone from Arizona, they win. They deal with real heat.

The hot it's like hot is the surface of the sun there. And you have to get in early, right? Like here, you could actually run late. Sometimes it's better if it's less humid later. But there, it's like after a certain point, you just can't even do it.

Yeah, it's wild. Yes, it necessitates a five o'clock run because the sun rises. Like it's glowing at five a.m. They don't spring forward. And so yeah, you've got like full sun just like beating down on you by six a.m., if not by like 5:45 a.m. So yeah.

Well, godspeed.

Thank you.

Make you a tougher runner. All right. So today we are turning the page, at least into the third section of the book where we talk about the mental side. So we've spent first two sections talking about the foundational training principles, the physical elements of training, the X's and O's, so to speak. And now we're turning the page to the mental side here in section three. This is chapter 21. And we're starting with a discussion on purpose. The question, why do you run essentially? And why are you motivated to train in this way? And we are of the belief that you should spend time working on a statement of purpose for running so that you have a sharper edge on the intrinsic motivation, the reasons why you do this. So when the going gets tough in whatever format that manifests, you're ready to go. You've got something to latch on to to keep you in the game, so to speak. And so we're going to drill in to specifically this idea of creating a statement of purpose, which some people might consider a little boo-woo or silly even maybe. And you might, the tendency might be for somebody to listen to this and be like, ah, you know, I don't need to do that. I've kind of got it figured out, but we would encourage everybody to take the time to really sit down and reflect and do this. And if you've done it already, to make sure you're going back to it periodically to update it, to make sure it's fresh, given whatever stage you might be in in your training. So today we're going to talk about kind of six things to help you craft a statement of purpose to understand your why. But before we get there, I've already pontificated a little bit on the why behind the why. But I want to hear your thoughts as the running philosopher in our pairing here of why is this important? Why should someone spend the time drilling in on purpose?

Well, you teed me up so nicely, and you called me the philosopher, which thank you, I'm not one, but I've got one I really respect, and that's Nietzsche, who said, he who has a why can bear any how. So I think that, sure, 80% of the time, you're just living life. You don't need some deep-seated why, but it's the tough times. It's the really hard runs, or the hard seasons where you're trying to keep up your running, whatever it may be. Those are the moments where I think you and I would both agree with this, even if it's different language. It's like, hey, at the very least, we'd rather you have it and not need it than need it and not have it. That old, I think that was like a Boy Scouts quote or something to that effect. I learned it as a kid, but it's that same spirit. It's like, I get the woo-woo comments all the time. People have heard of the concept of, you got to have your Y in Running enough that people can roll their eyes or think of it as cliche, but I think the spirit we're coming from is like, no, hey, when it's tough, we want to know you're set up for it. Or you can even think about it just as applied to a single point in the race itself. I don't want to create this doom scary feeling, but yeah, there's some value to exploring, why the heck do I get up so early? Or we were talking about the Arizona sun. It's like, why would I go expose myself to that? I hope we can help people have, help people find good answers to that type of question.

Yeah, it sharpens that reason for waking up in the morning, that reason for doing the work. It also makes you more resilient in the face of challenge, whether that be a period of inconsistency, injuries that pop up if we're talking about training, or when we get to the race itself, when the going gets tough, when you think you can't go harder, or when you think you can't finish strong, what are you going to tap into in order to have that staying power? Because you're going to have tough moments in training, in the race, and this helps you be more resilient through them. And one of the things I always talk about with this idea of purpose is that, and the reason we want you to spend time on it and drill in, because most people would they think of, well, why do you run? When they're answering that question, they might come up with a list of reasons that are all very familiar, perhaps, to people that move in this way. People will say, well, I do it because it helps me de-stress, or it helps me disconnect from the hard things in life. Or maybe I do it for health. I do it for longevity. So that I can be on this earth longer and show up for the people in my life in a healthy way. So those are some of the common reasons why people say they run. But I would submit that what we're talking about here is a level deeper than both of those reasons. Those are both great reasons to move in this way, to have this as a moving practice, stress relief, longevity, and health. But you can get those two things without doing hard races, without setting time goals, without running marathons or half marathons in a challenging way. And so there's a reason why you run, yes, but then there's often deeper reasons why you set goals, why you're striving to be the best version of you in running, why you're pushing beyond just those surface level benefits of stress relief and health and longevity, to try to get something more. And so when we're talking about this exercise, we're talking about drilling underneath those initial layers of reasons and trying to get the deeper, deep-seated, existential reasons to the surface. And I always make that distinction, because inevitably when I ask somebody the question, why do you run? I always get those two answers as reasons, and they're great reasons. And I'm glad you're in the sport for them. And those are great reasons to help supplement your motivation and purpose along the way. But it's always something more when you're starting to attach goals to it, when you're starting to train in the way that we advise people to train.

And I guess the only thing I'll add there is simply like, those are good starting points. Like, I would encourage people to see that as a spectrum almost. As you said, we're trying to go deeper. But it's not as though those more light hearted variations are invalidated in any way. But it's sort of like a curious starting point. It's like, well, I run to feel good. Cool. Why do you want to feel good? Or that's a silly one, because it's like, obviously, we don't want to feel bad. But just developing a little bit of that practice of kind of like pulling apart. Like, I run because it's entertaining. Okay, what do you think makes it entertaining? Or just learning to ask those questions. And in some ways, it's like a discovery of something that's already there. Like, I would say that everyone has a why, just not everyone's necessarily in touch with it, and knows how to tap into it. And therefore, the only reason for promoting this idea of being able to tap into it is so you can channel it in the moments that you need it.

So, yeah, and that's what we're calling upon here, is what's that second, third, fourth, fifth order of why, not the surface level ones. Because again, you can be healthy, you can be stress free running very casually. But when you're training for a specific goal and you're starting to find the edges of your performance, usually a deeper thing at work in that type of pursuit. So we're encouraging people to spend the time to work on a statement of purpose to find that deeper reason why you want what you want. And so one of the things we talk about in this chapter, chapter 21, is creating a statement of purpose. So we're going to talk about kind of six things to think about when crafting one. And then we'll also along the way perhaps give you some examples of things you might be calling upon as the intrinsic reasons that are deeper than those surface level reasons. So six things we're going to talk about. First one here, pretty straightforward, but we want you to actually write stuff down. This is not a thought exercise while there'll be plenty of thinking involved. We want you to actually put pen to paper, because it makes it more real. I think there's also something about putting pen to paper that helps bring out deeper level thoughts than just ruminating. And while you might spend time thinking and maybe you spend some runs thinking about this topic, ultimately we want you to take those thoughts and put them on paper. And when you're first doing that, and I think you can speak to this well James, it might be stream of consciousness a little bit. It might be disorganized. But, and it should be in many ways. You don't necessarily want to put order and structure on it. If you think about it like a brainstorming exercise in a group, in a brainstorming exercise, there's no bad ideas. You just throw everything to the wall without judging the ideas at first. And this is the concept here. You know, put stuff on paper without judgment. Take it from your brain, put it on the paper, let it flow in whatever disorganized form it's coming out, because that will help uncover some of the deeper thoughts. You know, I kind of equate this to a book that you and I have both read called The Artist's Way, which is a process by which creatives basically instill the creative process in their daily life, so that creative ideas, thoughts, whether that be art or singing or lyrics or music or scripts, people in those types of passions can basically codify getting more ideas. And one of the topics or processes in The Artist's Way is this concept of artist's pages, where you basically spend time every day writing out for a period of time just stream of consciousness thoughts that are coming out of your head, which helps clear the way for the creative thoughts to come, and or might incidentally spark creativity as well, just by getting out those thoughts. So this is that kind of idea. We want you to spend some time writing down. If you ask yourself why do you run what comes to mind and just start with pen to paper and let it flow.

Yeah. I love that recommendation, and I'll just make another plug for it because I do that. Just they encourage the daily pages, like three stream of consciousness pages every day. And I have found tremendous value in using that as a tool. But what's cool is this will actually make it easier in the sense that you're narrowing it to one subject. So it's just running. And so in the same way that we were talking about looking at your long runs as dress rehearsals or quote rough drafts, this take the same mindset here. I think if someone wants to sit down in 10 minutes and have a full kind of statement of purpose for themselves, well, then it'll just kind of it'll probably be someone else's. It'll be some cool one liners they've heard other people say. But I could see value like two different values in this. One, you might uncover something that's been floating in your mind or identify something you've been hung up on. Or two, you may be right cleanly. And again, you're not trying to make it perfect the first time. But after you write it out, you can go back and just look at things and make observations. Like, oh, man, I described a lot of happy thoughts here. And I talked a lot about adventure as opposed. Or someone else might write it all. And it's all like, I want to get better, and I want to get faster, and I want to win this. And you might almost uncover your own patterns in yourself just by letting it all flow and then look back on it and review it and just look for any kind of themes in your own writing. I think there's a lot you can take away from that.

Yeah, and it may come out, and it should honestly come out in a disorganized fashion. But what are all the thoughts that come when you're answering that question? So that's kind of tip number one in the process for creating this. And by the way, it's not like you have to do it every day either. You know, the artist's way is kind of creating a lifetime process of creativity for someone. But this might be a period of days or a couple of days where you're just spending time, stream of consciously answering that question and seeing what bubbles to the surface. So that's sort of tip one. By the way, ultimately, what we want you to do is have a statement of purpose at the end of this. So it would be a sentence, two sentences, maybe a paragraph, but likely not longer than that where you're actually codifying the top reason for wanting to run for performance. So ultimately, those stream of consciousness pages, we want you to work towards something that is refined, that is organized, that is succinct, but you can't start there. You got to get it all out on paper first. And as you're doing that, by the way, I also want you to be asking yourself questions. And it's sort of like the Socratic method where you're just asking for that second order why. If you have a thought that comes to mind, think about it deeper than just that initial pen to paper and say, well, why is that important to me? You know, for example, I'll give you an example from my own life. When I first started running, it was honestly a way to tap into the competitive side of me as someone who had grown up playing competitive sports, competitive soccer as my primary sport, stopped and quit playing as I was getting into college. I needed a new competitive outlet. And so, for me, the initial kind of surface level reason why I started running for performance was to compete, primarily compete with myself. But that in and of itself isn't the reason why. The real reason was underneath that. Well, why was I needing to compete with myself? Why was I needing that competitive outlet? And so, just using that one example, for me, I would have had to at that age, if I'd gone through this process, if I knew enough to drill underneath, why is competition important to me? And I didn't have the words to do it at that point. But that's an example of what we're talking about here, is you want to drill underneath those initial thoughts that come to your mind.

Yeah, and I'll just respond with mine, then, too, just kind of echoing you. Ours were similar, but yours went competitive, and mine simply, looking back, I didn't have the language at the time either. I ran my first marathon before I ever considered the idea of, what's your why for running? But in hindsight, I was 25 when I ran my first marathon. And looking back, it was like, oh, I was just a kid three years out of college, a little bit confused, not ultra confused. I was paying bills, I was a responsible person. I was waking up early in the morning, doing runs. It's like living the life. Most everybody listening to this is living, right? But in hindsight, I know that it was a confusing time of life, where I graduated from college, and I thought I had something to offer the world, and it was hitting me hard that it was like, oh no, you're just barely starting, buddy. There's still more that's gonna go into you than you have to put out, so to speak. But again, without that language at that time, I think I just gravitated towards a structured process. I was realizing like, oh, when life feels chaotic, I can hold myself accountable to at least one thing. And it's wild when you hold yourself accountable to one thing, all of a sudden the idea of like, oh, well then I'll just go do the next thing, and then I'll just go do the next thing. And so now I'm getting on a tangent about structure and chaos, but really I was just trying to say and covered in looking back that, yeah, that's what I was up to. It was this idea of ordering myself so that I didn't feel like I was looking in a hundred different directions and going nowhere in any of them.

And then the second order question for you was why did you need that kind of structure and order? Partially to make sense of a chaotic period in your 20s, but why? What was drawing that need to driving that need to pull it all together in a way that made sense and that running gave you that outlet for? So that's just an example. Write it down, get that stream of consciousness going, and then start to ask yourself the second order and third order questions under each, and show those statements that come to mind. The second thing relatedly, and obviously all of these are related, is you want to give yourself time to work on this. And people might ask, well, how long should it take? And the answer would be the annoying answer, which is as long as it takes for you to get something that really resonates. And so, you know, this might be... And my idea of it, and having done this before myself, I'm someone who works in kind of dedicated chunks of time, but prefer not to force resolution. And I think this is a space where you don't want to force resolution, you want it to come naturally. And so the thought processes around this should kind of marinate, to use a food term. It should marinate in you. And so I would spend 30 minutes, an hour here or there over a period of perhaps weeks, where you're just letting thoughts bubble up and come to the surface and refine. Then you're stepping away from it, kind of taking it out of your mind so that you can cleanse your mind, and then you're coming back to it. And maybe you have a thought pop up in the shower or on a run randomly, and you kind of rush back home, and you write down that thought that kind of pairs with everything else that's been building in the thought process. So to me, this is something that doesn't necessarily... It's not going to take a ton of time, but maybe over the course of two weeks or four weeks, in chunks of 30 minutes at a time, you're kind of working on it. But it shouldn't be something that you rush. Or even if you feel like you get to quick resolution on it, you should come back to it a couple days later and still see if that resonates. So, take your time.

And I like that because even those that are sort of like, I mean, if they're going to take the time to listen to this whole thing, I was just thinking of generating a word cloud too. Like if you're rushed or busy, but you said that idea of like you're in the shower and a thought hits you. It's like at the very least go jot down those the words that pop into mind. And then after a couple weeks, you'll have a huge word cloud that could then form paragraphs and sentences.

But yeah, you just don't want to rush it. And even if you feel like you get something quickly, you know, let it marinate some more, come back to it, refine it further. And we'll talk about this later. But I also think if you have someone close in your life that you trust, part of your process could also be bouncing off of somebody who knows you and who you trust so that they can help you refine it based on what they know about you as well. And that can be a part of this time taking process of just using your sounding boards in your life to help you refine it. So second thing, take your time. Third thing, don't multitask. When you're doing it, focus on it. Dedicated time. You know, do what you need to do to crowd out the noise, which in the modern world would be turn off your phone or shut down social media. You know, turn off the TV. Kick the kids out of the room if you're a family and just make sure that you've got the opportunity to focus. Throw on your headphones, your noise canceling headphones with the music that helps you hone in and block out the world for a little bit to go deep in your own brain and heart.

Yeah, I'm thinking of... Do you remember the Ron Swanson quote in the chapter? Did you put that in there or was that Jafar?

I think that was Jafar, yeah.

Oh, dang. Well, I was hoping you... Because I don't have it in front of me and I can't quote it word for word, but it was something to the effect of don't half-ass two things, whole-ass one thing or something to that effect, which I thought was so clever. So I don't know which one of you gets the credit for that, but it's all Jafar for sure. If you're going to invest the time, might as well get a return on the investment. Like again, focus in, even just with coffee after maybe an easy day run, you got a little extra time because it was a recovery run as opposed to a long extended medium long run. It's like those are good little quiet windows where you're still coming out of things anyway. Hopefully, that's a spot where you get a little bit of alone time. Spend 10 minutes, 20 minutes, whatever you got. Let the thoughts flow.

Yeah, and kick out anything that would be a distraction for you, which is hard to do in our modern world, but these are important windows to refine things. So that's number three. Don't multitask. Number four, keep it succinct. Ultimately, you want something as tightly written as possible, and this is way easier said than done. I even like to challenge people to simply complete the statement. I run, and usually I want to throw in for performance, or I run for a certain goal, because complete that with some sort of phrase so that you have one sentence that captures it succinctly. Now, I've seen statements of purpose that are longer than that, and that's okay sometimes, but the one filter I use when I see something like that, people are getting my perspective, is that a lot of times when they start getting longer than one sentence, then they start incorporating multiple reasons why. And not that there's anything wrong with uncovering all of the reasons why, but I prefer that people hone in on and focus on the most important reason why. And so a statement of purpose to me doesn't necessarily include all of those reasons. It includes the most important reason that you do this. So that's something I really challenge people on, and it can be hard to whittle it down to that, but if you force yourself to simply finish that statement, I run for performance because... then usually you can get there.

Yeah, and just to... I love the word whittle down, because we started with, hey, free flow, spend this time, just let your brain wander. And so then I'll give... This is a statement that's hyper obvious, but it hit me like a ton of bricks when I first heard it, but it was pay attention to that which captures your attention. The way Joseph Campbell, the professor who's behind The Hero's Journey, he was best friends with George Lucas, who wrote Star Wars Trilogy and Indiana Jones. He would always say, follow your bliss. This is the same concept, but said with a little more sort of intentionality. The idea of following your bliss is not necessarily just your whim, not just your pleasure of the moment, but rather pay attention to that which captures your attention. Like, why is it that I cannot ignore X? So where I'm going with that, if someone was doing this free flow process where they were playing with a word cloud, if you see a theme, that's super helpful because that crystallizes it for you. But yeah, if you had written it too long and you included otherwise, what I would encourage someone to do is just step back and be like, which one is the one I cannot ignore? That's a good signal or a good sign that, yeah, that one's speaking to you. And you can still pull threads later. Like, maybe you start with that and you can continue that process of pulling threads and deepening that, but still, I think that's a helpful cue, if you will.

Yeah, and once you get to that part of the process, to me, it's a little bit of hitting those reasons against each other, you know? A or B, A or B, which one kind of like to, you're at the eye doctor, one or two, one or two, two or three, which one's better? Which one's more clear? And you start to do that with your reasons, say, okay, which one resonates more? Which one hits me with a deeper feeling? Not that, you know, again, we're crossing off reasons why you, you run when we're looking at the bigger picture, but we're just crystallizing the most important reason. So keep it succinct. Ideally, ideally one sentence. If not, I'm okay with two. You know, in the book we talk about, it might even be a page, part of a page. But I would push people to, to really make it shorter than that if they absolutely can. So that's number four. Keep it succinct. Number five, we've got some thought starters for some questions that you might ask yourself. So part of this is just kind of emptying the stream of conscious, which through writing, what comes to mind when you think about why do I run for performance? But then I think there's some other questions that you can ask. We cover them in the book. I'm going to highlight four of them now, but there are others kind of sub questions under each of these if you dig into the book. But here's some thoughts or start thought starters that you can use as questions to answer to extend that stream of consciousness or to extend the word cloud concept that you talk about. First one is, what emotions does running bring to you? What emotions does running bring to you? So, and I love the answer. Answering that to me as a thought cloud concept, I think is perfect because you can just stick with one word ideas as one way to get to the answer. Another way I like to think about answering this question is if you have a general goal in mind and you imagine yourself getting that goal, what feelings come up when you think about achieving it, when you achieve whatever performance you're focusing on. So take yourself to that finish line and try to imagine what the emotions would be. And so this one to me gets to kind of the feelings, the emotions, the raw parts of the purpose, that again, might seem like a little bit of woo woo, but is where the good stuff typically lies. So stream of consciousness on this question, and you're going to uncover some good stuff.

Yeah. And again, staying in the present is the ideal. That's where we are. However, I like that you brought up picture or visualize. Like if you cross that finish line, what emotion do you think will come? I've heard that presented as like borrowing from the future, and we can also borrow from the past. Like to the best of your ability, the first time you completed a 5K or completed your first marathon, or the first time you qualified for Boston, or the first time you broke that big barrier of sub four or sub three or sub tens or sub eights, or whatever it is, we have all these arbitrary markers that we use to target as goals, but not purpose. Those are goals. It's like borrow from the past too. Like what emotions first hit you when you crossed that line. And if it was crying and then also laughter, then ask yourself, why was I crying? Like how could tears come from it? And explore that. So borrow from the past, borrow from the future.

In the spirit of joy. If they're tears, are they of joy? Are they of pain? What are they? And why would you have tears of joy? So that's one question to ask yourself is, what emotions does running bring? Second question to spend some time on as you're digging into this, what inspires you in the running world? So when you look around you and you see friends that might be pursuing the sport or perhaps elite athletes that you follow, what are they doing that inspires you? What parts of their story tug at your heart create tears or emotion for you? That is sometimes a way to shine a mirror or put a mirror up at your own motivation and motivations about what you're trying to emulate, for example. So what inspires you as another one to spend some time on in the running world?

Yeah, I like that one because I actually think that's the perfect application of that idea of pay attention to what captures your attention, or one of many good ways to apply it. Because I'm thinking of, you know, I did this with myself, like you should pay attention to who you really like and maybe why, and then even compare them to another athlete that's sort of like, but why don't I like that athlete as much? And early in my running, I remember I was super fascinated by Daniel Komen, who was the first to break eight minutes in the two mile. I even raced the two mile. I used it as a time trial, sure, in my training, but I'm like, he doesn't even do an event that I'm familiar with. I don't know this guy. He's not even from the States. But when I sat with the question, it was cool because there were other athletes that were just as prominent or great. So I came to this idea of not only did he master the sport, but he was someone who walked away from the sport as soon as he went and lived a normal life, and was able to be like, no, I got what I wanted out of it, and I wasn't like ruled by it or controlled by it. Like he had this piece about him. And I saw a similar theme, not that he walked away from the sport, in David Rodisha, who was an 800-meter guy. Again, no background in 800-meter, but those were my two favorite athletes. I'm like, what's up with these guys? Two soft-spoken, super humble, and yet absolutely dominant figures in their events. And I was like, I'm seeing it. They not only can order themselves in the sport, but all around these men are ordered. They are, and I guess, like I had to sit with that and realize, yeah. And now looking back and going back to what I said earlier about that chaos versus structure, I think those themes were inside me. But again, I didn't know that when I was first just kind of like, ooh, I like Komen or ooh, I like Rodisha. It was, it took a little time to process that. So I love that recommendation of look at other people in the sport, why do you look up to them or admire them or respect them?

I remember being inspired by Brian Sell, who was a Brooks Hanson's athlete when they were earlier in their formation as a team. He was really the first athlete that kind of made a name for himself from that group. And he, I think it was the 2004 Olympic trials marathoner. He went out fast at the beginning and gapped everybody, ended up blowing up completely, falling out of the top three. He didn't make the Olympic team, but he kind of put his name on the map in that 2004 trials, and then came back in 2008 in the Beijing trials, and ended up making the team. Kind of coming from this blue collar background, it's kind of, I guess you might call it a Cinderella story if you were talking about the team sport. But somebody who didn't have the pedigree, the background, the big name sponsor, at that time, Brooks was a relatively small sponsor in the game, and yet overcame those challenges to make an Olympic team, just because he was willing to do the hard work. And so I remember that being an inspiring athlete for me that kind of helped me tap into some of my reasons why, which is to essentially, by working hard, competing with myself, being able to beat expectations, be the surprise, so to speak. So anyway, that was an example for me. But when you start to notice the themes of who you are inspired by, then it can connect you back to some of your reasons. So that's the second question. The third question related, but outside of the running world, who inspires you in your inner circle of people in your life? So this is stepping outside of running, but just looking at, in general, in life, in work, in whatever pursuit outside of running, who inspires you and what are the characteristics about those individuals that connect with you? Because again, that can be a mirror to what you want to read and inspire in your own life. So that's another great question to look at.

Yeah, and just to take it one little practical step further, it's like, cool, write down their name and go out and make sure and tell them. I always try to remind people when someone compliments like a friend, but to me, I'm like, hey, make sure you tell that person too, because it'd be good for them to hear it. But where I'm going with that is, yeah, once you write their name down, describe them so that you can see the qualities. Because if you really respect them or you're inspired by them and then you describe them, it's probably evidence that that's some of your values. Not necessarily saying you have their same skill set or deliver on those or that you need to try to become them. But there's probably a reason why those certain descriptors, the characteristics are standing out. Again, paying attention to that which captures your attention. It's like, okay, cool. Like if you can just describe your running mate that you really look up to and just sort of write out descriptions for them, you're zoning in on some things that obviously you value or else, why would it be inspiring to you?

Yeah. And I think it's also an opportunity just to look for the good in your own life. I think sometimes we take people for granted. I think sometimes we take opportunities to be inspired for granted. And so by taking the time, by sitting down and thinking about it, you can pull out some of those things that are, that are reflected in your daily life that may have gone unnoticed otherwise. So think about who's inspiring around you and why. Fourth question here, which is a little deeper, a little more existential, is what deeper personal philosophy does running connect to? So that one's a little scarier question, you know, but it gets to, you mentioned the word values just a second ago, and it gets to the values that drive you and your worldview about how everything should work in this world. And so, it's a little bit of a deeper question, but I think one that if you really ruminate on can be important. And one of the things I think about, you know, if I'm thinking about my own journey is the idea of integrity is really important to me. And I mean that both in terms of the idea of like honesty and kind of a lot of people use integrity when they're thinking about truth telling or honesty. But not just that, it's also the idea of congruence, meaning how you operate in the world is how you are inside congruence. And the idea if you're congruent, if you're operating with integrity, then good things will happen to you, so to speak. And one of the things I love about running as a pursuit is if you walk the walk, if you do the work, you will get the results in general, right? That's one of the beautiful things about our sport. So there's congruence between the work, the process, and then ultimately the outcomes you might be striving for. And so if I dig into this kind of deeper philosophical question, running is ultimately a way to manifest one of those values in my own life, which is that, you know, if you do the work, if you talk the talk, if you live in congruence, then you'll get what you want.

I just like that a lot. So my main response was like, heck yeah, when you said like the inside matching the outside, that's a good cue for just overall health in life. I mean, I would encourage anyone to pursue that period. And I love that you get it through the sport of running specifically. But yeah, that's beautiful.

So a little deeper question, but something that will help hopefully bubble up some ideas. So those are four good thought solder questions on our fifth point here. The last one is, I think, important as you get to a succinct statement, but then also what does it look like as it evolves over time? And so a couple of kind of sub points here, but we want you to own it and then let it evolve. We want you to own it and then let it evolve. And so the ownership starts when you put it on paper, but then we recognize that you then have to try it on for size. And that might mean that it evolves in the near term. If you think, oh, okay, like that, that's resonating or not, and maybe you have to come back to it sooner rather than later. Or as you evolve in life, it's going to evolve as well as your goals evolve, it might evolve. And so just recognize that this is a living document, a living statement that's going to potentially shift a little bit as your journey shifts. But starting with that first point, you got to own it. And one of the ways we recommend doing that in the book is by actually reading it out loud to yourself at least, but perhaps also to someone that you really trust, who knows you well, who you can be vulnerable with. Because if you can do that and you get the warm and fuzzies, if you can do that and you get, I don't know, that gut speaking to you, so to speak, then you're probably on to something. If you read it out loud and it just doesn't click or doesn't feel quite right, then you got to go back to the drawing board and do some more work. But I also encourage you to read it to somebody you know, who knows you well, who can act as that mirror, who can say, okay, yeah, that makes sense based on what I know about you. And that might be a coach, a partner, a family member, a friend, a running buddy, could be anybody in your life that knows you well. But they're going to be able to say, all right, that makes sense, that jobs what I know about you, or they might call bullshit and say, wait a minute, I think there's something more here. And as a coach, this is something I love to help with. Because as I get to know athletes, usually I can see through, see through their motivations and their purpose to help refine, to get to that thing that really resonates. But that's sort of the first part of this last tip, is own it, read it out loud, share it, so that you can test that initial statement to see if it fits.

And I would say, just to add on there, is use it as long as you can. So for some people, that's maybe a year. For some, it may be 10 years and counting, and they haven't had to change it. But I'm just responding this way, because I like that you mentioned, there might be seasons to some of these. I feel like mine came in three-year chunks, and I'm not putting that out there as a parameter that others must... Like, every three years, do it. I'm not setting a protocol around three-year increments. I'm just saying, as someone who's lived this as well and really tried to be intentional in my efforts, it was always like three-year runs, like hypercompetitive phases, or that initial just structuring myself and ordering myself so I knew I could be reliable and people know what they can count on instead of the whimsical chaos of the 20s, right? And then there were other seasons of just like pure joy. But where I'm going with this or community, mainly community, it was like, I know I need to stay in shape, but right now people matter so much. And so this is like a three-year run of like just a community seeded reason, if you will. And all I'm saying there is that, yeah, there'll be times where it changes. So stick with it as long as you can. And then when it's no longer serving your purposes, the second time you go after an exercise like this, it'll actually become very kind of intuitive and easy to do.

Yeah, and I think that's familiar in terms of that kind of timeline. It probably connects to my experience as well. But I encourage people to revisit it at least every year, if not after every training cycle. Not that you have to change it after every training cycle, but go back, reread it, connect to it again. I always like people to revisit before a race, too, so they can make sure that that purpose is top of mind. And then the other time, I really encourage you to dig into it is after achieving a big goal. We'll talk about goal setting in a different podcast, but when people get two big goals, then sometimes it could be hard on the other side, because you've had an integrated purpose and goal that makes sense, that sings a happy song in your head, that keeps you out there doing the work to get there. And then when you get the thing that you've been striving for, sometimes that leaves people a little bit empty and wandering and wondering what's next. And of course, there's obviously a new goal setting process associated with that, but usually also there's a new purpose part of that process as well that then helps you find the next goal. And so whenever you get to a big milestone, to me, it's automatic that you got to go back to your purpose statement and refine it and reconnect to what it means to you.

And for what it's worth, I was going to say for what it's worth, I think that's brilliant. And this is also almost the antidote to postpartum blues. Like, you know, you set out with a three-year mission, purpose-driven, you know exactly what you want and why you want to do it on the other side. Sure, you're still going to miss things. You'll miss the pursuit of that target in that season, but there'll also be a little bit of a smile and some peace inside you where you just know, like, another reason for having the why in the first place is what I'm saying and being in touch with it.

Yep, so own it, let it evolve. It should be a living, breathing document, and it's certainly not going to last you your entire running career. So you should be updating this with some frequency as it makes sense. You know, if it still resonates, let it ride. But if it starts to shift, sit down again and spend time on it. So that's number six year. Write it down. Give yourself time to work on it. Don't multitask. Focus on it. Keep it succinct. We shared some thoughts or starters. And then the last point, own it and let it evolve over time. As we wrap this discussion, I wanted to get into a little bit of, I don't know what you might call examples or thought starters for people about just what, what could it look like? You know, what might my purpose revolve around? And so, and then we kind of give some examples in the book of this as well. But what comes to mind when you think of themes was probably the right word.

You know, we've got some big ones, some really good ones categorically in the book, but I actually want to answer the question, like honestly in the moment, and that's the thing I've been hooked on lately. And it took me like 13 to 15 years to even get in touch with this, but I like, I've dropped it all the way down to this idea of agency. The part of me that likes psychology and went on my little side trails of trying to better understand it, better understand myself, better understand my athletes, all of that. This idea of agency is just that deep seated, like I know I can do something. Like I'm up for the damn challenge, so to speak. And it's like, I think that's really important because that not only can get you through runs, but that's where that spillover starts to occur. So I don't want to say that as though it's a universal thing for all runners and then people need to say, that's my why. But that's a huge one. Just remember, like just knowing, like having a little agreement with yourself of like, knowing exactly what you can do. Like that's a good feeling, because you can make that commitment, you can deliver on that. I think that idea of like, yes, I look at things that are a little bit scary, but the more I step towards it and the more I move towards it, the less scary it becomes, and the more within reach it becomes. I think that general theme in psychology is so well represented in the sport of running itself, because, I mean, that was my experience. I picked 26.2 miles when I ran my first marathon, largely because it seemed insurmountable. That was the very thing that drew me to do it, not because I was good at the sport, because I thought, I didn't grow up a runner. I grew up a power lifter and a golfer, so 26 miles is like bananas. I've met people that, I've met some college football players, a wide receiver one time, I was hanging out with them, and he was just saying like, yeah, I jumped into a marathon and ran it, as it was going through, he was a Texas Tech receiver, and he was roommates with one of my buddies, and he ran a marathon just on his first try. So I'm like, clearly two different experiences, two different prototypes or archetypes or just athletes in general and everything. But for me, that number was insurmountable, like at the time. And I wanted to know, I could look at, again, didn't have this language back then, I'm using language now that I've learned, but that to describe the experience, and I'm like, yeah, that fits, and that was very much like, I want to look at stuff that I think I can't do and say, I wonder if I can though, like how far along this process can I go? It was almost like an invitational challenge, but not like the hardcore David Goggins layer, like I admire Goggins, but I wasn't trying to be the toughest man on the planet. I was just trying to be a pinch tougher than I was yesterday.

Yeah, I mean, that falls under this idea in my head of proving something to yourself is a big reason why for a lot of people. And I actually think, I think we talked about this before at one point, not sure on the pod, maybe on the Friday Q&A, but this idea of proving something to yourself, I think has degrees where you kind of stepping towards the Nirvana version of that. And when you first try to prove something yourself, it might be because I'm not sure if I can, but I want to know, I want to find out. And there's nothing wrong with that level of proving something to yourself. It's like, okay, can I run a marathon? Can I run a marathon at a certain time? Can I qualify for Boston? Can I run a half marathon at a certain time? I want to prove it to myself because I'm not sure I can. And that's kind of level one. And there's, there's probably a few different levels in between. But you're migrating, I think, over time, ideally, to a point where it's not about proving something anymore, and it's more about a celebration of what you already know. I know I can, I want this pursuit to be the celebration of the fact that I know I'm already there. And it's kind of basically an ownership of your own power and strength, right? Because all of us have it in us, so to speak. And I think when you're initially trying to prove something yourself, it comes from a place of not knowing. And ideally, over time, it evolves into a place of, I already know and I just want to show it and celebrate it. So that's my little adder to that. So that's a theme, proving something to yourself. I think there's a theme around proving something to others, which is one that you have to be a little bit careful with. You know, we talk about intrinsic and extrinsic motivation in the book. You know, science would tell us that intrinsic motivation is actually more powerful than extrinsic. So if you're trying to prove something to yourself, it's more powerful according to science than trying to prove something to someone else. But again, just like there are degrees of this, I don't think there's anything wrong with starting there, trying to prove something to someone else because they doubted you. You know, I've had people tell me stories of coaches or teachers or parents that didn't believe in them or maybe didn't show their belief in a way that they could feel. And so running becomes perhaps a proof, a proving ground figuratively to show them, hey, no, I can't, you doubted me, I can't. And so nothing wrong with that either. But also again, I want that to evolve, ideally, from they didn't know. So therefore I have to prove it to who cares what they thought. I'm going to do it anyway kind of thing. But anyway, so that's another theme is proving something to others. I think there's another theme that I'll get to in segue here, which is just to inspire. There might be a reason around inspiring others that can be palpable. You know, I've had people talk to me about inspiring their kids, inspiring their family members, inspiring others that they know, friends, whoever to be able to see that if you work hard, you can do something bigger than yourself. And so that's a theme that I see come up sometimes. With that one, I think it's important to make sure you really drill in on it. You know, I think it's easy to say, but harder to really mean and harder to really have it be the edge that matters. But it's certainly a theme that can come up in these types of statements. What else? What are we missing?

Well, again, we have some... This one's in the book, but I'm going to pick it because it was one of my biggest, that's kind of never went away. It wasn't always the top driver, but it's probably the one with the most longevity, and that's the adventure of things, the experience. And I guess it's connected to that idea of being able to answer the call. So in the same way, I don't remember if it was on a private recording or one of these recordings, but you spoke recently of kind of wanting to be in shape, that if any time someone needs a three hour to 315 marathon, it's like, yeah, I'll pace you through it. Like just that readiness. You know, I've done a lot of Rogue Expeditions through the years, like since they launched, and just, yeah, there was a good long stretch of time where it was like, I did my daily runs. I had to keep my at home consistent schedule going through the motions of programming. And still, I would still do quality workouts, long runs. I was still training for individual races, but there was a backdrop to, I kind of always want to be in shape to pace a friend through 20 miles, up to my pace limit, right? Like, you know, I had to accept where I was in my windows, but that idea of like, I don't want to miss out on the adventure and going in these places. Like if someone's like, hey, we're on a trip in Colorado, and there's a 10 mile trail run that we're all going to go on on Saturday morning, it's like, as long as pace is not the thing that knocks us out of the group, it's sort of like, I want to be able to say yes to that. That kind of feeling. But that requires the consistent training, because if you're not doing it regularly, etc., then all of a sudden when you get that 10, 15, 20 mile invite to go on this cool, adventurous trail run where there's this secret waterfall that everyone's going to get to see, I'm like, the FOMO in me is like, I at least wanted to stay in shape for those moments.

Yeah. And that one I think has layers too, because there's the literal adventure part of it, but then there's also the figurative adventure, the figurative curiosity part of it. I think about Courtney D. Walter's idea of the pain cave. She does these long races to explore the figurative pain cave. What does it look like when I go to the dark places? And how do I respond? And so there's a curiosity of adventure when it comes to her from a figurative sense with these big events that she does. And so it might be literal. It might also be, I'm just curious to have adventure around my edges and limits. What happens when kind of thing. So there's a couple layers there. Another theme I think about, and then we can wrap the episode. This one, I learned from or I saw in our mutual friend, Paul Terranova. He was somebody who was always doing big things. 100-mile races, Ironman triathlons, not just 100-mile, but hard 100-mile. What he called one year, the Grand Kona Slam, I think it was, where he did the four Grand Slam 100 races, and then Kona Ironman World Championships at the end of it all in one year. But anyway, in getting to know him as an example, I'm speaking for him here, so Paul, you may have different things to share, but this was my interpretation of what I think motivated him, which is that he wasn't somebody I think that was trying to prove anything to himself or prove anything to anyone. I don't think he was necessarily trying to inspire others, although he was very inspirational to many and still is. But what I think I learned about him was that he was doing it because he wanted to solve problems. He's an engineer's mind who liked the challenge of these big events and putting together these events in sequence. And it just created a challenge that he had to solve. And so he was motivated by figuring out how to get through these challenges in a way that would allow him his best performance. And again, unique, different. Some people would say he did it for others or to prove something or to inspire. And all of those things, I think, were happening at some level. But knowing him personally, I think he just did it for the problem solving. Can I figure it out? And to me, that's kind of cool too.

Absolutely.

So anyway, those are all some examples and some themes, hopefully, that perks at least your mind and some thoughts. Obviously, you can't just take someone else's purpose and co-opt it to be yours. It has to be meaningful to you. But hopefully, those are thought starters to get you thinking and ruminating on what your purpose might be for those that are listening. So, any final thoughts before we wrap this one?

I mean, there's a part of me that wanted to quote Paul Terranova, because I can see him in the early morning hours one day where he was like smiling. I think I was talking about how I had slept through a couple of runs or something. And he just said it so kindly and playfully with a smile, but I knew he meant it 100 percent. And he was like, well, you can choose the pain of regret or the pain of discipline, James. And he was not being shoulders back hardcore. He just was like clearly in touch with like, yeah, you know what? I'm going to choose my pain properly.

That's good. Yeah, I think every time my alarm goes off, that quote goes through my head. Pain of discipline or pain of regret. You know, you're hurting either way. But you feel so much better after the pain of discipline than the pain of regret. So yeah, that's a good way to wrap it. Hopefully that inspires somebody, but go do the work on this. Again, if you made it this far, you're probably prepared to take it seriously. But we really, really encourage you to take the time to put this on paper. It will give fuel to the fire that will help you burn brightly towards your goals. So we'll wrap it here. A few reminders, as always, 2 p.m. Central on Fridays. Come join us for our Q&A on Instagram, at Rogue Running. James and I will answer your questions about this podcast or about anything involved with your training. If you want to come join us on that every Friday at 2 p.m. Central. Obviously, you can check out our training options at roguerunning.com. If you're curious about what might be best for you, you can also email us, coaching at roguerunning.com. We've got in-person coaching in the Dallas and Austin areas, as well as virtual in various formats, wherever you might be. And follow us on Instagram at rogrunning. Follow me at Rogue Chris. And we can wrap it there. You guys go work on your statements of purpose, and we'll talk to you next week.