Hey, everybody, welcome to episode 353 of the Running Rogue podcast. This is your host, Chris McClung, coming to you after a little bit of an unplanned hiatus. Excited to be back with you on the mic today. Gonna be answering some listener questions that really run a broad range of topics. Should be something in here for everyone today. Excited to be back with you. Again, it was an unplanned break, a little bit of all good things, but a lot going on in the personal life, a lot going on with our business as we transition seasons to get people ready for the fall races coming up here. All of that starts in May and June, and so it's been busy in a good way in a lot of different ways. And also, honestly, I'm looking for new topics. I need new topics. I've covered 352 different things on this podcast, and I don't like to rehash topics. There's probably some things I could go back and talk about, but if you have topic suggestions, I would love those sent to my email, chrisatroguerunning.com, and that's R-O-G-U-E, running.com. Before we jump into today's topics, just a couple of quick notes. One, I want to thank my sponsors for this episode, John G. Running Apparel, as well as BetterHelp, H-E-L-P. They're my sponsors for this episode, and I'll be talking about them more mid-episode, and of course, giving you some offer codes. Secondly, it's also a really important time of year because we open our virtual group training that I coach, the Rogue Renegades. I coach it with James Dodds. The Rogue Renegades, that is open only two times a year, the beginning of January and the beginning of June, and we're in that open window right now. It opened up on June 3rd. I'm gonna keep it open all the way until June 23rd. We've already had some people jump in, but I haven't had a chance to talk about it on the podcast, so I'm gonna keep it open. I'm gonna keep it open for another 10 days or so. So jump on that if you want to jump in to train for fall races with us, get into the Renegades. Now is the time to do it. You can just go to our website, roguerunning.com, click on virtual group training, and that will take you to the sign up link. And of course, if you have any questions about that, you can email me, chris at roguerunning.com, and that group will train you for everything that might be coming up in the fall. We have a speed track for 5K, 10K. We have a half marathon track, and we have a full marathon track, of course, really targeting any races that fall between September and January of 2024 into early 2025. So now's the time to jump in there. It's also important that we point out that we have now two virtual group options, one coached by James Dodds primarily, and he has a co-coach there, Kerry Dyer, who actually trained with me for a long time in Austin, and I personally mentored her as a coach. That group is called Rogue Rising. That's more for that newer, less experienced runner who might be a little bit lower mileage. We're using 40 miles a week, at least a history of 40 miles a week, kind of as a penciled in demarcation between the two. That group is open and will stay open because we're building momentum with it. And then we have Rogue Renegades, which is only open twice a year. That's gonna be for that person who's running roughly 40 miles a week or more, or at least has a history there already who might be more experienced with the marathon and the half marathon in particular, so that you're able to jump in and handle the load that we provide there. So both are open now. Rising will stay open. Renegades will close on June 23rd. So if you wanna jump in on that, jump in on it now. So that's all I have for intro items. Let's jump into our main topics for today. Again, these are listener questions that I've been assembling over the last six weeks or so. Always love to get emails from you guys, and I may not respond right away, but I do like to accumulate these questions and then get to them as I can. And they always make good podcast fodder. So thanks for those that sent them in. And again, if you ever wanna throw in questions or topic suggestions, don't hesitate to email me, chrisatroguerunning.com. Again, that's R-O-G-U-E, not R-O-U-G-E. Okay, so first question, and this one has come actually from a lot of different places, especially as we hit the summer months. Summer officially is just around the corner, and it's gotten hot in many places. It's particularly hot early season here in Austin. And so I've gotten a lot of people asking me both via email and then across the groups that I coach about training in the heat and some things to keep in mind for that to make sure that you're appropriately adapting to it. And people also want to know, well, how quickly do I adapt to the heat and get used to it? And so I want to dig into that really quick as a reminder about summer training and how to manage all of these warm temperatures. So first of all, in terms of heat adaptation, it takes, in my experience, four to six weeks or so for your body to adjust to the temperatures and to perhaps the rising humidity that you might be facing. And so you need to give yourself time to adjust. It's gonna feel more challenging in the early part of the summer before you start to get into that rhythm and get used to it. And while it will never become perhaps pleasant, it will become more tolerable as your body adapts to it. So give yourself at least four to six weeks to feel better in the warm conditions, and then your body will adjust. Now, once you do adjust, that doesn't mean that you still go blindly hammer the same paces as before, because there's definitely some things you want to consider while training through the heat so that you can manage it well. The first I'll talk about is just paces. From a pacing standpoint, we have to adjust our expectations when it comes to pacing in the warm conditions. Naturally, if we were to go to altitude, if you were running at 8,000 feet, for example, and you were slower or winded at similar paces, you would say, of course, I'm slower or more winded at these paces because I'm at 8,000 feet. And then you would slow down to a point where the effort was more manageable and or more similar to what you're used to in lower altitude conditions or at sea level conditions. That's a natural adjustment that we make without questioning it. But for whatever reason, even though it might have a similar impact, we don't make those same adjustments for the heat. So keep in mind that effort is king. And in order to maintain a similar effort, you need to slow down in the summer months in order to get the same physiological benefits. And so I find that you might have to adjust 30 to 40 seconds per mile across all of your paces from easy paces all the way through to your workout race paces in order to maintain a similar effort in the warmer, more humid conditions so that you're getting the appropriate physiological benefit without taxing the system too much. So what might have been 30 to 40 seconds faster at a similar effort in January is now going to be 30 to 40 seconds slower at a similar effort in June or July, and you're going to be able to get a similar physiological benefit because you're running the same effort. And effort is king. Effort is what gives us that physiological benefit. We use pace as a proxy to help us find the right efforts. Sometimes we use heart rate as another proxy to find the right efforts, but those are not the end all. Those are just inputs to help you calibrate where you are from an effort perspective. And so keep in mind that you have to maintain effort in order to get the right outcomes. And that means slowing down in the summer. So if you're not already doing that, if you're stubbornly forcing the pace because your ego is involved or you're worried about what you're putting on Strava, please, please let go of that. And I would say, in some cases, you may need to adjust by even more than 30 to 40 seconds per mile in order to have it feel okay and manageable and do that with glee. Do it and embrace it, because if you can do that, not only will you feel better, but again, it's going to make sure you're in that right physiological zone in order to get the benefit that you want. So slow down. If you're not already doing that, please do it now because it's only going to get more challenging as the summer progresses. So we have to slow down. What else do we have to think about in the summer? Another thing would be really just wearing as little clothing as possible. I know that sounds maybe a little bit strange, but when it's hot, you have to really strip down. In our conditions here in Austin, where it's hot and humid, for guys, going shirtless is pretty much required. And wearing as little as possible for women that you're comfortable with is going to help you beat the heat versus stubbornly trying to maintain the same gear. Now, if you're in a warm and dry environment, you might be able to wear a little bit more because evaporative cooling is going to work. But I always tell people wear as little as possible. One of my favorite brands for that is Kraft. They have some Kraft really thin, short sleeve Kraft base layers that can serve as a primary layer in the summer months that help you, if you do need to wear something, help you cover up and get something that's as light and wicking as possible to make sure you're not overheating. So wear as little or as light of clothing as you can. And then the other component here, of course, is hydration. Hydration becomes a full-time job, and if you're not on top of it with electrolytes, then you will feel the effect. Your body needs water. It needs to be able to absorb water in order to kickstart not only the recovery processes, but also to help you go and move. It's a part of the respiration chemical reaction. If you're not getting enough hydration, you're not going to be able to do what you want and you certainly aren't going to recover as well. So I want to make sure that you're doing a few things. One, you're supplementing from a daily hydration standpoint with electrolytes. I think once the summer kicks in and it started for me in May here in Austin, I do a daily electrolyte supplement in addition to the electrolytes I might be taking during exercise. So I'm taking at least one big serving. I use LMNT right now as my primary electrolyte supplement, but I've used Scratch, I've used Noon, I've used straight salt pills from Enduralytes, I've used different things, but I take that outside of exercise every single day in order to make sure I'm getting the electrolytes which allow you to absorb the water that you're taking in. If you don't have enough electrolytes, osmosis doesn't work. You have to have electrolytes to actually absorb it. So daily supplementation outside of exercise. You will also want to consider supplementing during exercise using some of those products that I recommended because again, if you're not getting electrolytes, then you're not actually absorbing the water that you take in. One sign of that, some people say, well, I'm drinking plenty of water, but I'm peeing all the time. Well, one sign of that, if you're peeing too much and you're peeing clear liquid every single time, that's a sign that you're not actually electrolyte balanced. And so what's happening is you're taking in the water, it's going into your bloodstream, it's then knocking on the door of the cells, trying to get in, but can't, because osmosis doesn't work if your electrolyte balance isn't right. And so then eventually gives up, passes through the kidneys and out through your bladder as essentially water that has been wasted. It went into your bloodstream, but didn't actually get absorbed into your cells. And that's where electrolyte balance comes in. So make sure you have good electrolyte balance, peeing too frequently or too clearly is a sign that you've got that a little bit off. You know, the flip side of that is if you're not drinking enough and your pee is dark and yellow, then that's sign you need to drink more water with electrolytes as well to make sure you can absorb it. The other thing I remind people of in this window of time is that I want you to make sure that after longer runs and workouts that you get back to normal hydration levels as quickly as possible. You're going to naturally dehydrate a little bit on your runs because it's hard to take in everything you're sweating out. And you want to finish that run and then hyper hydrate afterwards. Do as much as you can to get back to ping normally with a very faintly yellow color so that your body has the water that it needs to kickstart the recovery process as well as, of course, the fuel that it needs. Well-balanced, solid meal after those hard sessions in particular, so that your body has all the building blocks it needs to rebuild its muscles. So particularly in those windows after exercise, make sure you get back to normal hydration as quickly as possible. I'll have people tell me, well, I didn't pee until like three or four hours later. That's a sign that you're not on top of that post-run, post-long run, post-workout hydration as well as you should be. You want to get back to peeing normally as quickly as you can. So stay on top of that post-run, post-workout hydration as well, which might also mean that you need to carry while you're doing it so that you don't build up as much of a deficit that you need to dig out of. And so sometimes that means carrying a handheld, drinking while you go. I've got a whole episode where I also talk about doing a sweat test, which some people, particularly heavy sweaters, might need to consider to make sure that they're taking in enough fluid while on their runs as well. If you want to learn more about that, go check out episode 283, where I talk a little bit about doing a sweat test if that's something that you need to dig into. So make sure you're on top of all of these things, because what will happen is, if you're not, you're going to feel lingering fatigue. You're going to not feel sharp on your runs. Your workouts aren't going to go as well, and it's going to be a tough slog through the summer. Inevitably, I'll have somebody come to me here in the summer and say, hey, I'm just not feeling it. Things aren't going well. I've had consecutive tough days or tough workouts or tough runs, and I'll ask them about their hydration, and they'll say, oh, I've been slacking on that. And inevitably, when they get back on top of it, they start feeling better again. So if you're already behind, get on it now. Slow down those runs. Amp up your hydration with electrolytes throughout your summer so that you can still make the most of summer training. Okay, that's number one. Came from a few different places. Next, I want to talk about a question from Anna, listener Anna. Thank you for sending this over, Anna. She asks, I ran my first marathon this last weekend. This was back in May and accomplished my goal of sub four. 352 finished, congrats, Anna. It was incredible. Felt strong the entire race and kind of second guessing now if I could have gone harder. Three days post marathon and I barely had any sorties left from the race. I'm thankful for all of that and don't have any regrets because I enjoyed the race. It does have me itching to get back out there though and train for a 3.30 time. There's another local race on September 22nd, 2024. I was planning to go with your recommendation of taking three to four weeks off of running post marathon. That being said, do you think it's crazy to go do another marathon that quickly? I'm a mom of a soon to be two year old and my husband and I thought we'd probably start trying again after this recent marathon. Now I'm questioning whether we do that or I sign up for that September race and use the fitness level I'm at now to go get my next goal before baby number two. Okay, Anna, there's a lot to unpack there. The short answer, if you want it, is no. I do not recommend you do that race in September. First of all, it's already too short of a timeline because if you do the three or four weeks recovery, which is appropriate, so I appreciate that you're thinking about that, then really you only have June, July, August, September, you don't even have four full months before you need to race again, which is just not enough to properly detrain and then go back through the phases of development again, priming, aerobic strength, race specific, and taper. It's already too tight a timeline, not to mention the fact that mentally it's hard to stay on it for that long, much less rebuild the body physically. So the short answer is no. I don't want you to do another marathon that quickly. And this raises a whole bunch of other things that I want to emphasize when we're talking about these types of things. One generally is that I think everybody's in way too much of a hurry to get their goals. We all need to stop and take a longer term view on that journey. Because when we do things, when we take shortcuts, including something like this of not giving enough time from marathon to marathon, then it costs us something. It costs us something. At a minimum, it costs you the ability to lay more groundwork for long term potential. And that's kind of best case scenario. And on the downside, it could even hurt our ability to achieve that long term potential. Or said another way, it could reduce that long term potential because you've taxed the body too much. You might end up in an injury cycle that will ultimately limit your ability to get wherever you want to go. And certainly it might affect the timeline to get there. So first thing is everybody needs to take a longer term view of their trajectory. I know we're all in a hurry for one reason or another. Some people, looks like in Anna's case, it's about having that second child, which I totally get and understand the pressure associated with that. I've coached a lot of women through pregnancy and through having multiple kids. And I've also coached a lot of people that feel that time-lighter pressure associated with aging. And I would say in both cases, and there may be other scenarios by which people feel the pressure to move more quickly, but those are two common ones I see and face. Under both scenarios, I still encourage people not to optimize around those quote deadlines, but rather to optimize around what's best for your body long-term. And the fact is, and you're gonna be able to have a second kid and you're gonna keep training and you're gonna have even more strength and power on the other side of that. I've only seen women get stronger through pregnancy if they're managing their during pregnancy training and managing their post pregnancy recovery well. I've only seen women come back stronger. Mom power is a real thing. Your potential is beyond probably 330, and it's beyond having that second child. And when you have that second child, you're gonna be able to go chase it in an even bigger way. And hey, maybe you wanna have a third child, and then there'll be something even beyond that. So just don't rush it because you wanna have a kid at X point. The question more to me would be, okay, what's the next building block I need to work on in whatever timeline I have? We can talk about that here in a second. The other common thing I hear is people talking about, well, I'm getting older, so I need to rush to get somewhere. I was recently consulting with a woman in her 50s who got into running later in life and has started marathoning, and she has certain goals, and she's talking to me about how the Grim Reaper is coming for her speed and that she has to do everything right now in order to get these goals that she has before she suddenly slows down. And she's someone as a result who's been doing three or four marathons a year to try to keep chasing this goal because she thinks that the Grim Reaper or that age is coming for her speed. And so she's trying to rush everything and do everything right now. And the reality is for somebody who started later in life, you can continue to get faster for a long time. And we should never plan for the Grim Reaper to be coming to take our speed. It's just, I've coached people in their 40s and 50s and even 60s and 70s. And I've seen people continue to get faster, especially those that start later in the life. In life, if they focus on the fundamentals, if they take a long-term view, you don't have to rush it. And in fact, rushing it will only hinder your ability to get whatever potential might still be there. So please, whether it's pregnancy or age or whether you feel pressure socially or ego-wise to get a certain goal by a certain time, just let go of all of that because it's not serving you. It's not serving you in reaching your long-term potential and it's not serving you really in, honestly, the speed to get there. Because sometimes what seems like the shortest path means that we take longer because we're actually going the wrong way instead of taking what might not seem like the more direct path but doing it the right way and getting there sooner. So as it relates to somebody like Anna who's trying to get to 330, my question for you, Anna, would be, okay, what do you need to work on in order to get that 330 goal? Is it raw speed? You know, how do your 5K and 10K results relate to that 330 potential? Because maybe you have the raw speed and it's just about building that staying power, which means we need to work on volume and consistency. Or maybe you don't, maybe you don't have a history with those distances and we need to actually develop that raw speed so that you can be more efficient at half marathon and marathon paces and hold those paces longer. Because the 5K and 10K become ascent become limiters for what we can do in the longer stuff. And so what your strengths are, what you need to work on will determine what's next. And I would say, don't worry about when that kid's gonna arrive. Just ask yourself, what's the next thing I need to work on in order to put together the building blocks towards a 330? And I would submit, it's probably not running another marathon. It's probably working on something else. And so maybe you need to do a half marathon block. Maybe you need to develop that into the range. Maybe you need to do a speed block, a 5K, 10K block. Think about what you need to do optimally, ignoring the timeline. And when the baby comes, we'll take the appropriate hiatus and then get back to it when it's time. But don't rush just because you think there's this deadline coming in, because it's just not, it's just not. It's not real, and it's also, it's gonna sub-optimize the journey to that 330. So be patient, don't do that marathon, work on something else, take a long-term view, and you'll get there. Okay, before we get to my next question, actually questions from listener Sarah, I wanna talk about my partnership, my sponsorship with Run Johngee, Johngee Running Apparel. They are functional and beautiful providers of running apparel, something that I'm pretty much wearing exclusively, love all of their gear. Also been wearing it around casually as well, especially when I've been on some family trips recently. It's been great for all sorts of activity, not just running as well. Their story is a cool one. They were founded by a couple of college teammates who wanted to do something different in the running apparel space and give back while doing it. So not only did they create cool functional product that's highly durable, they've got a five-year run everywhere guarantee, but they also support through the proceeds, 2% of all revenue goes towards water projects all around the world. So it looks good, it works, it lasts, and you're giving back while buying their stuff. So I would highly recommend you go check out their website, johng.com, or runjohng.com. You can use my code Rogue, R-O-G-U-E, all caps, just Rogue, for 10% off. On their website, that's not a one-time use code. You can use it as many times as you want to get whatever gear that you want. Again, that's code Rogue, R-O-G-U-E, all caps, for 10% off, whenever you might buy from their site. So go check it out. Again, runjohng.com, code Rogue, 10% off. Okay, let's dive into my next question. We've got two actually here from listener, Sarah. So Sarah's coming back from an injury. She was referring to an episode of 348 that I did on rational, irrational fears. She asked, firstly, the segment on being afraid that we will never come back from injury is especially relevant to me right now as I am dealing with a pretty gnarly injury, a femoral neck stress fracture. I've been unable to run for nine weeks so far, and it's been awful. Luckily, I am a medical student myself and also have a fantastic medical team around me to help tackle all of the many health care needs related to this injury, but that doesn't make the mental element any easier. I remember you mentioned in the fears episode that if we need some stories of inspiration from other people or even famous athletes to look up to who have suffered through a similar injury, we could reach out to you. I initially felt silly to do that, but I'm getting pretty worried at this point. And so if you do know of any elites or other competitive runners who have come back from a form of moral neck stress fracture, I would love to hear them. Well, happy to share. First of all, sorry you're dealing with that injury. That is no fun. I've dealt with stress fractures myself, and I've got a lot of thoughts on them, but I can tell you that there's definitely success on the other side. The last stress fracture I dealt with was in 2016. Ended up sort of pushing that one over the edge in the 2016 Boston. Came back to run a PR in the marathon a couple years later in Houston in 2018. So it's absolutely possible. Plus, I know others who have done it. Allison Maxis, who has been on the show and is a three-time Olympic trials qualifier. She qualified for Houston, LA, and Atlanta Olympic Marathon Trials and happens to run our Rogue Expeditions business. She's been on this show a couple of times. She's had multiple pelvic stress fractures and has come back from those to only be a stronger runner. Of course, you can point to elite athletes. Kara Goucher, being a friend of mine who has dealt with stress fractures. She dealt with them in college and then went on, of course, to have her illustrious pro career. And so there's no shortage of examples to look at, both at my level and the elite level, on people that have come back stronger from stress fractures. But I do think it's important to handle a stress fracture appropriately. You know, some people, for some people, the diagnosis of a stress fracture is in some ways a relief because you're typically going to have people tell you, okay, you take time off, you don't run, you don't have the impact for anywhere from six to 12 weeks, depending on the nature of the stress fracture. Those are the typical times you might hear that you take off. But I want people to know with that injury that you need to dig into it even beyond just that time off because as a coach, one thing I've seen and really I've experienced as myself as an athlete is usually a stress fracture is a sign that more than one thing, a perfect storm of issues is brewing that you need to address at their root causes before you just get back to full-on training again because oftentimes, yes, there's a volume and intensity component perhaps that you've pushed too far, but usually that's paired with something else, some sort of underlying biomechanical issue, potentially a micronutrient deficiency, potentially a blood work-related deficiency or even a bone density deficiency. There's usually something else going on when we get a stress fracture that's pushing us over that edge. So I always encourage people to dig beyond just the training causes. There might be some training causes. Maybe you ramped up too quickly. Maybe you did too many miles. Maybe you were too aggressive and pushed the intensity too much in that training. Maybe that was a factor, but usually there's other things going on where you might have a biomechanical issue that you need to consult with a PT, a physical therapist on. You may also have some underlying micronutrient, fueling, blood-related issues that could be cropping up and causing your bones to be weak. It could also be a bone density thing. There's usually something else going on. It's not just one factor that's involved. And sometimes it's all of those things. Sometimes it's biomechanical, training-related. Sometimes there's also deficiencies involved from a blood work perspective. You really want to look at all of those things and maybe you're already doing that, Sarah, but I want to emphasize that. Get to the root cause and then look beyond the training impacts because there's usually something else going on there. And maybe you're already doing that, but I just want to emphasize it. Anybody who might be in that situation, dig below the surface, especially when you're dealing with femoral stress fractures or pelvic stress fractures. There's usually more going on than meets the eye. The other thing I always tell people that get a stress fracture is you're going to get some advice from the doctor that says take X weeks off. My recommendation is add two, at least, to that, because you just, you don't want to start back too soon. If you do, you're subject to potentially re-injuring the area in question, and you don't want that, because then you got to go back to the beginning and oftentimes take a similar time period off. I can tell you, when I first got a stress fracture in my shin training for my first marathon in the year 2000, I came back too soon, re-injured the shin, and ended up then having to take another eight weeks off. So it ended up being about three months in total, and that wasn't any fun. So add time to that time off while you're also trying to understand the root causes. And it's easy to be thinking about kind of getting to the encouraging part. It's easy to be thinking about, oh, I'm missing this time. I'm not going to be able to get back to where I want to be. And those are all tied up into the fears that you're talking about, Sarah. But what I want you to understand is that, in many ways, this injury is a good thing because it's raised a flag, a big red flag, that's telling you there's something not right in your training that can help you learn and then help you come back even stronger. And so if it's a biomechanical issue, if it's a nutrition or fueling related issue, if it's a bone density related issue, it's going to help you uncover some root causes to this that you can work on and fix while you're getting healthy that will allow you to come back even stronger and be more resilient when you do come back. Because if you're not using this as a chance to learn, you're just taking your time off, you're staying off of it, and then you're jumping right back in, then it will have been in vain. But if you use it to learn, you're gonna be able to come back stronger and more resiliently. And that's absolutely critical here because this could be the big red flag that allows you to unlock future potential that you wouldn't have been able to find otherwise. And so that's where I wanna encourage you. This is your chance to learn where you are missing so that you can come back stronger and more resilient and have better performances down the road. So use this as that opportunity to pause and learn and come back stronger and with more information that will allow you to be healthier down the road. And I promise you, the fitness part of it, all of that will come back. I've seen people rebuild from injury. And yes, you have to do it patiently, but I've seen people rebuild from injury countless times and come back stronger and race faster. I'm one of those examples, but there are many. So don't fret. You will come back stronger if, especially if, use this as an opportunity to learn. Okay, so Sarah's second question is what to do when I am hopefully able to finally start running again. I'm a 251 marathoner, 122 half marathoner, 37 minute 10K runner who typically runs 80 miles per week, but obviously haven't been doing that for the last two months. I know that typically any runner gone for even partially as long as I have would need a serious base building phase before resuming other types of training, and I am game for that. However, I have been cross training religiously this entire time, and I've worked super hard to maintain my fitness by doing moderate aerobic work for 90 minutes per day plus 20 to 30 minutes of whatever limited strength training I can do. This usually means stationary bike at 60 miles per hour at a medium resistance or swimming with a pull buoy in my legs for 90 minutes. I can't at aqua jog due to the location of my fracture. I occasionally and do, and occasionally I do hand cycle workouts. So it does feel like my past nine weeks have been one gigantic aerobic base building phase just via other modalities besides running. How should I take this into account when building back for running? Okay, this one's gonna be harder for you to hear, Sarah, and perhaps harder for you to embrace. Even if you're maintaining some aerobic fitness during the time that you're out for a stress fracture, I don't think that changes the approach in coming back. Because remember, the aerobic system may be developed, but the musculoskeletal system, the neuromuscular system, isn't. It's been sitting on the sideline, and appropriately so, given your injury, especially as it relates to impact, the pounding of the pavement associated with running. And you just simply can't rush back. And in fact, the fact that you've been maintaining the aerobic stuff makes it a little bit dangerous, because the aerobic system is gonna be primed and ready, and ready for you to get out of the gate while the musculoskeletal system is gonna be so far behind. And the thing to remember is that you're not just having to come back from that particular spot of injury being an issue, but the whole body has to get used to loading again. Every single part of you has to get used to loading again. And so oftentimes what I see people do is they might maintain that aerobic stuff and then they come back and then they get injured somewhere else because it's been sitting on the sideline and needs to be appropriately loaded back in a very, very gradual way. And so I love the fact that you've maintained some routine and built some fitness aerobically while injured, but I don't want you to come back quickly. I still think you have to be very patient and come back as if you haven't been doing any aerobic training at all. And in fact, I honestly encourage people to not worry so much about maintaining aerobic fitness while in these windows of having stress fractures where you're not supposed to be doing activity. Really for a couple of reasons. One, because especially with something like a femoral or pelvic stress fracture, any of that work can be dangerous. It can put stress on the system and cause you to not appropriately rehab it. But also because it primes the aerobic system, and so then when you come back, you have this temptation to come back sooner. And really, I want people to completely detrain, and I want to have to rebuild it all patiently and together. And because the aerobic system isn't there where it needs to be, then the musculoskeletal system necessarily has to come back slowly with it instead of the aerobic system being way ahead and then therefore pushing the musculoskeletal side faster than it wants to be pushed. So, honestly, I prefer people take the mental break associated with time off during a stress fracture. Sure, do some aerobic stuff casually as you need to to stay sane, but don't worry about the fitness part of it. And then just rebuild it all together when you come back and do it very, very patiently. And especially coming back from a stress fracture, I want you to take a full season, five to six months where you're not worried about a race at all, but you're just worried about reestablishing the load, reestablishing routine, and doing it in a way that doesn't cause you to be re-injured. And that's where I would refer to episode 323, where I talk about building or rebuilding from an injury and how to put those components together because you want to build back routine first, then add volume, then add intensity and quality. And whether you've been hanging out, doing a bunch of aerobic work or not, I think you still have to come back as patiently as if you've been sitting on the sidelines completely and not doing any of that aerobic work, unfortunately. Because otherwise, it's going to cause you to ramp back too quickly and I'm afraid re-injure it again. So please, please, please take that long-term view, give yourself a full cycle without racing, coming back from this so that you can ensure that not only are you strong and resilient, but you're also able to incorporate anything you've learned as to why this stress fracture popped up in the first place. So that's my perspective on it. Just be super patient. But I promise you, Sarah, you'll get back there again and you will have faster times ahead of you, but just be patient. Okay, before we get to my last listener question, which is pretty loaded, there's a lot to it, I want to talk about my other sponsor for this episode, BetterHelp. They are the largest online therapy provider and they're here to help you with really anything that life might throw at you. I think sometimes, or oftentimes, we think of using therapy as a means to work through something really difficult or challenging or tragic, and certainly that's a place for it as well. I've used therapy when I've had a close friend pass away dealing with that grief. That's something I've absolutely tapped into. And a place like BetterHelp can tap in. You can tap in to them for those sort of situations, but they're also there to help you take stock of things, to monitor your progress, to celebrate and perhaps facilitate wins in your life as well, or just to deal with a challenging situation you might be facing such as parenting. That's one for me that I've tapped into actually BetterHelp for, is getting some parenting advice for parenting a new teenager in my house. And while again, everything was going well, and he's a good kid and all those things, my wife and I were finding ourselves struggling to figure out the right way to adapt our parenting to the fact that suddenly he didn't like us anymore in a very teenage way. So we got some help from a therapist who specializes in parenting to help us work through that. And so therapy is really all about helping you through any of life's potential moments. So I would encourage you if you're interested in getting that sort of support in whatever way to go check out BetterHelp. It's a really easy online platform that's convenient, that's flexible, that's really suited to your schedule. All you have to do is fill out a brief questionnaire to get matched with a licensed therapist. You can switch therapists at any time, but then once you get matched, you set it up, and then you do it from the comfort of your home via a virtual platform that's facilitated by BetterHelp, really easy. So take a moment, visit betterhelp.com/runningroguetoday to get 10% off your first month. That's BetterHelp, help.com/runningrogue. Go check it out. Okay, here we go. For my last question, this one's from Tamara. I have listened to many Rogue Running podcasts and enjoy them very much. I think it's evident that you have deep knowledge base when it comes to running, community, longevity, and the sport of running. I wanted to ask, do you know of Dr. Stacey Sims? If not, I'd recommend checking her out. A lot of your messaging is appropriate for men, but some of what may be important for men is not helpful for women. I'd love it if you would have Dr. Stacey Sims on as a guest to talk about endurance athletes and the training differences between men and women. Caution, it might mess up your whole messaging. Here's a link to one of her most recent blog posts about zone two training for women. And that's a post I'll link to in the show notes. First of all, I'm a huge fan of Dr. Stacey Sims. In fact, we choreographed and created an entire training program for women called The She Squad. That was a virtual training program. Facilitated by a couple of our coaches, Ruth England and Jen Howard Brown, to specifically use the guidance of Dr. Stacey Sims from her book, Roar. And so we are fully supportive of everything that she talks about and thinking about how that can be incorporated into training, because certainly there are differences. And those differences haven't been studied enough, and we're still learning and evolving. And in particular, things like how women should evolve their training through pregnancy, through their menstrual cycles, even through menopause. As women face that later in life, all of those things are still being learned and understood. And Dr. Stacy Simms' book, Roar, is a great starting place for that. There's even more research now since that book has been released. And there's another great book from Christine Yu called Up to Speed that talks specifically about the science behind women in performance and training and all of those things. That's another book that I have enjoyed and read and believe me, anytime there's an opportunity to learn about the difference between men and women or even different types of athletes, I am someone who digs in and reads about it. And I'm continually updating how I think about and approach training. But this, as the science has evolved so far in this realm, I would say that one of the things that we're learning is that the differences you might see in women can also be hard to generalize. So one example, if you talk about training through menstrual cycles, Dr. Stacey Simms and her book, Roar, recommends a certain protocol, depending on the different phases of how you manage intensity through the menstrual cycle. And subsequent studies since that book has been released are actually pointing to a slightly different approach to what she recommends in her book, Roar. And if you look at the meta-analysis work on women training through their menstrual cycles, it's actually telling us that there isn't necessarily a cookie cutter approach you can apply to all women, that in fact, the best way to manage your training through your menstrual cycle is to track it yourself and then adapt based on how you specifically respond to the different phases of your cycle. And so really, the best recommendation now on women training through their menstrual cycle is not in fact to apply a cookie cutter approach, but rather to track and apply an individualized approach. And that's something that has also been true for me as I've coached a lot of women through pregnancy, is that every woman responds differently both during and after pregnancy. And so how you have to evolve someone's training as they go through the various phases of a pregnancy is going to be unique, not only for each person from woman to woman, but also even from each child, from child to child, it might vary for an individual woman. And so what I've learned in those situations is that instead of applying anything that's cookie cutter, you actually need to look at the individual. And just as I do with any individual, tailor things to them specifically and how they're responding. The same thing has been true in training through menopause or watching women train through menopause is that we actually have to treat them as individuals and adjust their training based on how they're feeling throughout that process. The same is true with women or men as they age. You can't just apply any cookie cutter rules and say, well, because someone's aging, then we have to change X, Y, and Z, but rather instead we have to look at them as individuals and adjust what they need to work on. You know, the only rules of thumb that I can apply blanketly in any of those situations is one, during menopause, I find that women definitely need to make sure they're amping up the strength side of things and working on perhaps power and intensity with lower volume than perhaps we've used at other times. But again, that may not be true for everyone. We have to look at each individual, see how they're responding, adjust as they go, and tailor the stimulus to them. Now, getting to the specific article that is being referred to, again, I'll link this in the show notes. The title of the article is What Women Need to Do Instead of Zone 2. So first of all, if you think I am blankedly applying Zone 2 training to everyone, I would encourage you to go check out the episode specifically that I did on Zone 2 training where I talk about the mythology around that language and how my approach responds to it. So episode 344 is where I talk about my perspective on Zone 2. You can't just blankedly apply that. And in fact, some of the social media influencer and bro-science stuff around Zone 2 is really misleading and misguided. So you need to understand my perspective at a nuanced level by going to check out that episode 344. But the other thing this blog from Dr. Stacey Semmes talks about is that HIIT training, or high-intensity interval training, is better for women when it comes to general fitness building because women are naturally stronger at the long and slow stuff, not only because of how their mitochondria work, but also because of how their fuel burning works. And so it talks about with those strengths that women actually need to work on the high-intensity interval type stuff even more for general fitness building because that is more of a weakness relative to men. And while that might be true for general fitness, I want to emphasize a point that Dr. Stacey Sims emphasizes herself in the blog is that the long and slow, easy stuff, which would incorporate not just zone two, but also zone one is really important for endurance athletes who want to get the best out of their performances from that perspective. And so she says, even in her, the blog herself, which I can quote, she says, I'm not saying it is pointless to do this, this kind of training, not at all. You need it to have the strength and capacity to go long. What I'm saying is that to spend a significant amount of time in low intensity zone two training does not enhance mitochondrial respiration or oxidative capacity like it does for men. So there is a difference in the stimulus that men and women are getting in terms of that type of training. But as she said, it's still important to do it if you're training to be an endurance athlete. And so I want to make sure that those people who have read this blog dig into particularly that point, which is that you still have to work at it. And as somebody who coaches probably more 65, 35 women to men, that's something that I've seen across the board for as long as I've been coaching, that if you want to get the most out of your endurance ability, men or women, you have to work on the long, easy, volume building stuff. And yes, there are time, there's a time and a place for the high intensity, interval type training. My training has that too. And certainly men and women, and by the way, individuals are going to respond to that differently. So sometimes we have to tailor the work to get more out of certain people. But I believe the fundamentals are still the same. And just because you might naturally have a strength at something, because you're male or female or whatever it may be, doesn't mean you don't work that thing. You have to develop both strengths and weaknesses. And if you want to get good at the long distances, half marathons, and marathons in particular, you have to work the aerobic foundation, that aerobic capacity that Dr. Stacey Sims referred to in her blog, by going easy and going long. So that's my answer, Tamara. It doesn't blow up all of my messaging, as you might suspect or have expected. It just helps inform and engage and helped me think about, helped me think about making sure that people get the fundamentals, but also at the right time, work on the things that they might need more. And that can apply across individuals, which is certainly a way I think about it today, whether they're men or women. So there's my answer. Again, if you want to read that blog, you can go check it out in the show notes. But that's it for today. Those are my questions. I want to again thank all of you for sending those along. If you have questions or if you want to learn more about our training, don't hesitate to reach out to my email. If you have a show topic, chrisatroguerunning.com. Thanks to those that submitted questions for this episode, whether they knew it or not. Thanks to my sponsors, Run Jonji and BetterHelp. Thanks to all of you for listening. Good to be back with you. As always, you can check us out at roguerunning.com or follow us on Instagram, Twitter, or Facebook at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.