Hey, everybody, welcome to another episode of the Running Rogue Podcast. Chris and James here coming to you from our first episode of the new year. I guess it's actually the second, but the first one we're recording in the new year. So happy new year, happy 2026, everybody. We're excited to be back with you. Episode 385, approaching that 400 mark soon. Excited to be back in the new year. How are you, James?

I'm doing well. It's a bright, sunshiny day. I may not sound like I'm doing well. I am coming off of the flu, but I am just so freaking thankful to not be in the hole anymore.

Brutal, absolutely brutal. I was watching something last night on how it's just been rampant this season, the flu going around. So get your flu shots, everyone, if you haven't already. We're excited to continue stepping through the book. Today we're going to talk about the other half of Chapter 2, which is the first half. We talked about the training fundamentals. Now we're going to be talking about the racing fundamentals. We've got six different points here, just like we had six on the training side that we're going to get through probably again in two episodes as we tend to be long-winded. But we're taking our time with some of these fundamentals. I think one of the things to emphasize with this episode is we're going to be talking about the racing side of things. And I think when people think about training philosophy, they don't necessarily think about some of the things we're going to talk about today. But they're important. They're equally important in many ways because there's the training, the work to do to get ready to run your race. But then there's the race itself and how are you prepared to actually go execute and deliver on that training. And I think that's a part of the equation that is sometimes neglected or forgot about in these conversations. And so I think there's going to be some people that are thinking, well, why aren't we talking about this now? We just talked about training. Why are we talking about racing? That's kind of skipping to the end, isn't it? And in our mind, it's not because as you prepare for whatever your goal might be, you have to be ready with the mindset to not only deliver on the training fundamentals, but also be prepared as you are going through the training to deliver on the racing fundamentals as well to get your goal. So I'll pause there. Any thoughts on that as we tee it up?

Yeah, in that in the same way that you had just said that, you know, in the same way that the the training itself is physiologically or physically preparing you for race day, I think there's so much that goes on on training that you should be able to use as a dress rehearsal for race day. I just had a call yesterday with an athlete who had mentioned something like, shoot, I'm not exactly sure if I'll hit all eight 1k repeats. And I was thinking to myself, I love this moment. And she was like, what? And I was like, because that's probably how you, not only probably how you will feel on race day, you should feel that way and think that way on race day. I'm like, you know, if you're a mile 23 of a marathon, and you're thinking, I don't know if I can hold this pace for another 5k, I'm like, that's okay. You just hold it for that next mile, and then you figure it out in the next. And I was like, that's what I want you to do in these 1k repeats. It'll be tomorrow, actually. So on Thursday. Anyway, yeah, that's just my way of saying, yeah, I agree.

Yeah, because with racing, you're stepping into the unknown. That's a part of it. We wouldn't do it if you weren't, right? We're trying to see what our limits are. We're trying to figure out what we can do when we find the edges of our ability. And it wouldn't be interesting if we weren't operating there or dreaming about things we've never done before. And so by definition, if you're dreaming and you're trying to achieve a goal you've never accomplished, you're entering the unknown on race day, no matter what. You can't know if it's possible when you get there. And as you eloquently said there, in training, when you have those opportunities to enter a similar unknown, it's a chance to practice that mindset that will carry over to race day. And so it all matters. It all matters. And I do think as we go through the book, having these principles in mind in terms of race day, mindset and execution are important because it does allow you to practice it when you have those moments in training, when you're not sure. And I think there's not enough people practicing some of these elements in training so that they are as prepared as they can be when it comes to executing on the day. So we're going to step through it. We've got six racing principles that we're going to talk about. Probably get to three of them here in part one. The first one is gonna, I think it's kind of the racing equivalent of do the work. You know, the sort of hack need. I've heard this before. This is an overused phrase kind of concept. We talked about it in training, which is do the work, be consistent, right? That's something you hear in a lot of areas. And in this case, we're gonna go number one for this, which I think is the racing equivalent, which is trust your training. Trust your training. And that's gonna be the one that sounds like that common phrase you hear. Oh, just trust what you've done. And in this case, you know, we want to take it beyond just that overused kind of phrase of trust, whatever you've done, but more take it to the real application of trusting your training. And to me, it gets to this question that you were just talking about of, well, what do I do when I'm going into the unknown? And what I like to tell people to do when they're going into the unknown is to focus on what they do know. It's easy to get lost in the, I don't know, I'm not sure. I can't know what's going to happen at mile 10 of a half or mile 23 of a marathon. So then fine, ignore that part. Focus on what you do know. And so one of the fundamental things that we preach is you got to trust the work that you're doing, which means focus on what you do know, which is you know that you've put in the work. You know you put in the miles. You know you've done the workouts. You know you've done the long runs. Even if you haven't done them all perfectly, that's what you can lean on stepping into the unknown on race day when you're not sure what's going to happen at mile 23 or 13.

Yep. Yeah, and you just said, even if your training didn't go perfectly, I would say like it's precisely why we say that. Precisely because training, there is, I guess in some ways, there is no such thing as a perfect training season, right? Because even-

I say it all the time.

Yeah, even if you did, quote, do everything on paper that your coach told you to do, because the concept of progression overload exists, because there is just always like a continuum, there is no such thing as, quote, like we could say that Kipchoge has run the perfect marathon thus far. But one day, someone will beat it, right? We just know that that continuum never ends. And because of that, psychologically, what athletes do going into races is often think about the things that they can't control, or that maybe they're emotional. Like, I don't know, there's such a myriad of thoughts that overcome the athlete through that race weekend because their brain's going crazy, they're tapered, they're feeling that tapered madness. I think that we point them back to this because we know that there is no such thing as a perfect season. So you have to take what you did and you have to anchor in something that's already real. So instead of relying upon like, oh, I hope I'm like as motivated as I could be on race day. It's like, well, like as coaches, we try to give speeches and get people pumped and motivated, but it's like motivation can come and go. But what won't quote come and go is looking back and saying, all right, I put in 800 miles for this training block or 600 miles for this training block. It's like, we're trying to give you something concrete you can hold on to. That's also, this is very, very, very important. It's rooted in you. Because that's all you got on race day. I mean, we do have the supportive community and we'll talk about that. Those are extra layers. But what I'm just trying to get down to real quick is that you have to trust your training because it's like, that's you. Those are the ingredients that you put into the cake. That is literally what you want your mind focused on as opposed to letting the monkey brain go crazy and go a thousand different directions. I heard someone say, just because you experience thoughts doesn't mean you're a thinker. And so I know that people just get overcome with so many thoughts that it's like, no, okay, well, if you don't want those thoughts to overwhelm you, plague you, you need to think about something. It's hard for the brain to zero in on like a very specific idea and entertain a myriad of quote distractions. And so there's a lot of reasons why we say trust your training. We're giving you something specific to think about. It's something that can control the mind, and it's rooted in you, like what you're about to bring to the table that day.

Yeah, it's concrete, it's tangible. One of the things we advise people to do going into race weekends, we've got Houston coming up this weekend, is to go back, look at your training logs, look at the work you've put in, look at the tough days, the hard workouts, the long runs that you weren't sure about, and remind yourself that if you can do those ingredients, then you can do what you're being asked to do when the race is on the line. To me, the cool part about this one is that it also requires this merger of the two sides of this equation. You've got the training principles, you've got the racing principles. In order to kind of transition to race day and be comfortable and to trust your training, you have to believe and have faith in the fundamentals of the principles that we've talked about over the last two episodes, which means that you have to believe that all of the pieces of the puzzle every day has a purpose. Running slow when you should go slow, making sure you've got a long run built in, a speed workout built in, a medium long run built in. All of those elements running by effort when you need to, all of those elements individually won't make a difference, won't get you where you want to go. But if you do them all, execute them all and believe that they're going to work, you won't have anything at the end of the day that points perfectly to, I can do this for 26.2 miles or 13.1 miles. But what you will have as we use the puzzle analogy on one of these episodes, you will have a puzzle where all the pieces have been assembled and put together that paint a picture for you that it's possible. So trusting your training is also another way to me of saying have faith in your training, have faith in the principles that they're going to work, because none of those elements individually will give you 100% assurance that you're going to be able to do what you're asked to do. But when you assemble them all into a puzzle, then it's there. The picture is there to give you that confidence. And so it requires you to have faith that going slow is the right thing to do, that recovering appropriately, hard days, hard easy days, these are all the right things to do. So that when you're bridging the gap, taking that leap of faith from training days to race day, you know it's going to come together.

Another thing that popped in my mind as you were talking, you had quickly, it was in passing, you had talked about that long run, that workout that didn't go as well as you wanted it to, et cetera. It reminded me also, it's not only trust your training, but also focus on what you did do as opposed to what you didn't. And I feel like it's worth adding that in here and tucking that in because the perseverating mind of the marathoner, we know it. We talk to, it's unbelievable how many conversations we have with athletes because of our virtual setup and we get to interview all of them. And I think it's helped us quite literally understand. I don't want to say it in a universal, but I mean, it's like, if you consider Rogue a microcosm of like running in America, it's like, I think we're pretty tapped in because our sample size is so unbelievably large. It is well beyond what we would need to call it statistically relevant, right? And so we know that mind, and it's like the majority of you people going into your races, and I say that with love. You do think about that one dang workout that didn't go well, or that one week you got the flu, and so you missed like 20 extra miles that you'd otherwise had, right? And so it's like, I remember thinking one year, I don't know, I was probably seven, eight years into coaching at this point, so I can't pinpoint it, but I remember thinking like, wait, if, you know, Lydia had always said like, miles are like money in the bank, right? And so I had the bank analogy in my head, and I was like, hey, in that room, if you go in there, there's gonna be $800. Grab it all, come out with it, it's yours. You go in there, you come out, you only picked up 760. I promise you, you're not disappointed. You're thinking about the $760 you had in your pocket, as opposed to the 40 that you missed, right? So if you could just think about it like money, sure, I know you would have loved for your training season to be perfect, but focus on what you did do, because that's still a lot of money in your pocket you didn't have.

It's still a lot of money. It reminds me of a conversation I had recently with a Houston Marathoner coming up, and she was talking about having this cycle that wasn't perfect for a variety of reasons, but one of the things she said was, and there was that long run I turned from 20 into 18, and I remember thinking, okay, so you've done, I don't remember the exact number, six 20-mile runs. One of the, or you had six planned, one of those you turned from 18 to 20. So you have five 20s and an 18, and we're talking about the two miles that you missed, quote unquote, on one of these runs versus the almost 120 miles that we're talking about in aggregate on those long runs. So anyway, so that helped her put it in perspective. Okay, we're talking about two miles. It's kind of like that old Jim Mora press conference where he's like, playoffs? Are we talking about the playoffs? It's like, two miles? Are we talking about two miles? When you've done five 20 mile runs and an 18 mile run? So yeah, that is the mindset, is people want to think about the things they didn't do versus think about the things that they do. So I like that you brought that up. It's also, to me, you said it earlier, there's no such thing as a perfect training cycle. I say that all the time. And I would submit that there shouldn't be a perfect training cycle. They don't exist because things happen, but also they shouldn't exist because things happen. You should be taking the plan and modifying it somewhere for some reason. It might be that recovery day where you're just feeling beat up and you're like, hey, I'm going to pull a mile off of this because I'm just slogging. I'm not feeling good. Or those days you're sick where you just take off because you need that break in order to recover and get back healthy. Or the travel that you had planned where there was stress on both ends and you had to modify your schedule accordingly. There's always something that pops up. And we want to beat ourselves up for making those changes when something like that pops up. But really, that's when we should be patting ourselves on the back and saying, okay, that's the choice I should have made. Because that allowed me to manage the stress I was dealing with, manage the issue that popped up, stay consistent with my training on the aggregate, but modify so that my body can get through whatever additional load it was managing. And we want to beat ourselves up in those moments, but really we should be celebrating those moments. And so I would submit there's no such thing as a perfect cycle and there shouldn't be. Because that means you're not listening to your body when it's telling you to change. So that's a bit of an aggression and kind of going back a little bit to the training principles side. But it connects to this mindset going into race day to say that, hey, if it wasn't perfect, that's okay. The other thing I want to mention here that I think is often forgotten and overlooked is that you're trusting your training going into race day, not just for the cycle you just did, but you're trusting it for all of the cycles you've done before that. And that's something people forget about too. They want to say, well, this cycle wasn't perfect because of X and Y and Z. I just had a conversation with Morning on another Houston Marathon. And she's like, well, I got sick and missed the last big week. And the first week of taper wasn't ideal. But this is a runner who's been doing it for a long, long time. We're talking probably a decade of running and marathoning. And she's carrying all of those cycles into this Houston, and going for another BQ for her. And that all counts. It all comes with you. And just because you had a little bit of imperfection in this one, again, rightly modified because she was sick, then it's OK because you're standing on the shoulders of a lot of miles in the bank over not just one cycle of five months, but many years' worth of cycles. And so you're trusting not just that cycle, but so many cycles before it. If you have that history, obviously, if you're new to it, it's whatever your history looks like at that point. So trust your training. It's not just cliche. It's a matter of, and the tactics of it to me are pretty simple. There's the philosophical concept of it, but then there's also just the tactics of, OK, I'm going to go back and look at my training logs before I sit down and race. I like to, in my head as a coach, there's certain workouts that I call anything workouts, which is shorthand for, if I can do that workout, I can do f-ing anything. And so I like for people to go back and kind of circle those moments, the big long run workouts, the big workouts during the week where it's like, if I can do that, or the workouts where it was crappy weather or you just didn't feel great but you did it anyway, circle those on the calendar, look back at those and be like, all right, if I can do those, those signpost elements of the training, then I can do anything. And carry that with you in race day. Because again, as we said, it's not about what you don't know at that point, it's about what you do know.

Yeah. And I also like to, I love that. I think that's priority one. Definitely anchor yourself on those big ones for the big, obvious, confident, building reasons. But I'm a guy who likes the patterns too. And I like storylines. And we're all in a story line, truly. And so I like to go back and review something. And kind of, especially if you could do it with a really open mind, you could see like the day you ran a 10-mile, and you're like, oof, thought I was going to die. And then like a couple weeks later in your training logs, you're like, best 16-mile run of my life. Like it's, when you read it all at once, they all, like any one starts to diminish, and you sort of feel the pattern of like, oh yeah, I had dips and then moments of confidence and then dips through my training. And isn't that going to happen on race day?

Yeah, you overcame in training, that carries forward. And that's why as a coach, I like it when it's hard. You know, everybody wants, especially with long run workouts, which we haven't talked about in full depth yet in this series, but we will get there. Those are the big workouts where you're doing pace work inside the long run. A lot of people put an emphasis there, rightly so, because they're important, but they want them to go perfectly. Speaking of no perfect training cycle, they want them to go perfectly. Personally, as a coach, I love it when they don't, because you have to fight, and you have to face the mental demons that you're going to face on race day. And so it's an opportunity to practice not just the physiological changes we're trying to achieve, but also the mental battles we're trying to win on race day. And so, yeah, you can, when you overcome in training, whatever that looks like, whether it's within an individual workout or run, or whether it's kind of brushing off that bad day and moving on to the next and having another good day, those are all opportunities to make the mind more ready for any challenge you're going to face on race day. So it all fits together. And again, I don't think people think about enough of that on the front end. So then by the time they get to this race day planning, they're kind of like, oh, shoot, what am I going to do now? Am I ready for the next leap? But if you kind of bring it from this perspective, it's like, no, I've been ready. I've been getting ready. Yeah. And then it comes down to doing the thing itself, which is a good segue to number two. So first here is trust your training. Second is execute the plan. Execute the plan, meaning have a plan. First of all, kind of step A here of this one. And two, then be able to run the plan. Because if you have a plan and you run the plan, you're controlling the variables you can control to give yourself the best chance. And there's a great quote from Running with the Buffaloes, the old Mark Wetmore or the story about Colorado Buffaloes. Chris Lear wrote it, followed the Collision Team when they won the national title, or I don't know if they won it as a team, but Adam Goucher won the national title in that book. And he kind of follows the behind the scenes. But there's a quote in there from Mark Wetmore, the coach of Colorado at the time, who said something, and I get this right, but paraphrasing, there are no miracles in running on race day. Basically his philosophy being either you've done the work or you haven't, either you're ready to run the plan or you're not, and there's no miracles. And so he was all about preparing his athletes to run a race a certain way, and then having a specific plan to go execute on that day. And more often than not, you do. Because if you're ready to run the plan and you run the plan, then you're good. And so that's what this is about is knowing what you're capable of, having a plan, and then executing that plan to the best of your ability. Doesn't mean you're guaranteed an outcome, but it does mean you're giving yourself a really good chance. And we'll kind of parse this out. It starts with the part of having a plan, but I'll pause there and get your perspective just on the overall.

I have two responses because I definitely want to come back to that plan piece. But that quote you just shared by Wetmore, it reminded me of, you know, a second ago, you had said, trust your training. It's not just a cliche. And I almost brought this up then. But it's like, what's the alternative? I think people forget to ask the question. Like, people love to pull down arguments. People think they're good at arguing when they know how to tear down someone else's argument. And I'm like, no, no, no, no. Have you ever tried to construct one? Like, I want you to learn how to build a case. And that starts with asking the question, what's the alternative? Like, if you're not going to trust your training, what else are you going to trust?

Right?

Are you going to hope for a miracle? Well, good luck, you know? And I love you, too, at the same time. I'll never judge the person that goes for it like that, but I'll also have to be there to give them a hug when they're limping and walking at 18 or wherever it breaks down, right? Anyway, so back to executing the plan and having a plan. Yes, I believe this in life and absolutely within running, but a bad plan is still better than no plan at all. So if someone sort of like, I don't even know how to construct one. Also, I used to do this when mentoring people in software. I had to set up some parameters around myself because I was always happy to help. But what got rid of like 80% of the people that would ask me for help was just simply responding, what have you tried? And so where I'm going with that is like, at the very least, look at your race course and write down what you think you would do. Just you don't have to be an expert. You don't like even if it's your first marathon, it's like put together something like just, and we'll get into details, I'm sure, of how to build. Well, that's even later chapters. So I don't know if we'll cover it today.

We'll have full episodes on it, so we won't go too deep today. You know, we'll lay out the general principles of it.

Yeah, but I feel like there's a lost art of the rough draft. It's like, I want to encourage people to just like, you know, if you got a race coming up in a week, like look at the course, write down what you think, write down what confuses you, like just be very clear about like, I don't know what I'll do with that kind of hill, and how much should I slow down or pick up based on the grade of the hill. So you don't have to be an expert. It's just like, start with some kind of plan, put your mind around things because it'll start to further crystallize your own thinking. But if you just sort of leave it to the wind, well, when you catch wind, A, don't be surprised and B, consider without a plan, how are you going to improve next time? Like, what are you going to be able to pick apart or iterate upon? Right?

Right. Well, and how are you going to get the goal? More importantly, because a race with no plan, even one that's loose, generally is not going to give you a very good chance of getting what you want. So have a plan. Kind of part A of this point, and we'll cover that in depth as we go through the book and talk about how you plan races depending on the distance. But the general overarching principle that can carry you into most race distances, for those of us that are distance runners, 5K and beyond, there's nuance to it, obviously, depending on the distance, is that you start slower than you think you want to finish, build into the race, and then you finish strong. Negative-splitting races, as a general rule of thumb, is the way to optimize your performances. And that's both proven by the physiology, but also proven statistically, when you actually analyze a gazillion results across all of these distances, is that starting smart, starting conservatively, and building into the race, and then finishing strong, is an optimal way to get your best performance on a given day. And then from there, with that as kind of the baseline, then you say, all right, well, depending on the course and the nuance and the grades, like you were talking about, how do I adjust that in order to accommodate whatever this specific course might be throwing at me? And that's just a pacing part of the plan, right? But then there's also the other parts of the plan, which would be your nutrition and hydration parts of the plan, like, how are you going to take your gels? What's your plan in terms of water stops? Gatorade versus water versus carrying your own handheld and then, of course, there's the mental parts of the plan, which we always talk about. How are you preparing your mind for race day? What are the mental tools you're going to use when you execute that plan? And that's not even to mention the plan pre-race in terms of logistic management, meals the night before and all those things. It's like, you want to eliminate all the variables that might be out of, that might be out of in your control. And so that what's left is just the stuff out of your control, weather and whether people are doing and things like that, so that you can give yourself the best chance. There's always going to be stuff thrown at you. And so have a plan. That's in some ways the easy part of this point. And then the other part is, then you got to actually execute the plan. You got to have a plan and then you got to be able to execute it, which means you got to be able to feel what it's like to start at a certain pace, so that you can start more conservatively. And it doesn't mean you have to be a perfect pacer, but it does mean you have to have a sense for it, so that you can actually do what you want to do, and then get to a pace that's your target, and hold that, and then finish strong off of it. So there's the execution of the plan, then that becomes the next challenge, which is something that takes a lot of practice for most people. And I think one of the things that's kind of lost when people are new to racing is or in experience with racing, I should say, they're really focused on the time outcomes. And well, what if I could run this, or what if I could run that? When I try to orient them back to, what about the executional outcomes? Like early in someone's running career, I want them more focused on how they run the race than on what time they run in the race. Because the time they run in that first, second, third, half, or full is gonna be nothing compared to where they go. But if they learn to run it the right way early, then that's only gonna unlock more potential sooner. So being able to execute well is so much easier said than done, but is an absolutely critical part of the equation. And execution comes back to the training principles, where it all ties back together of running by feel and being able to dial in to certain paces and efforts. Because if you can do that in training and a workout, then that's gonna carry over to being able to do it when you have a plan for race day. So that's kind of part B. You gotta be able to execute, but it takes a lot of practice. So what would you say there?

I don't know that I have a lot to add there.

All good. But it is, as I said, easier said than done. And one of the things that I think, and this is where we talked about it, and I don't know if it was one of these episodes or in one of our Friday Q&A's, which, quick side point, shout out for our Friday Q&A's every Friday, 2 p.m. Central. You and I are on Instagram Live. If you want to get live Q&A's from us, jump on our Instagram, and we'll be on the Rogue Running Instagram Live, you and I talking and just taking questions in the comments and answering them for about 30 minutes or so. So if you have questions prompted by any of these episodes, go check us out there and get them answered live. And some of those might spur topics that we bring back here too. And eventually, we've also talked about maybe taking this to Facebook Live, or sorry, to Instagram Live, or sorry, YouTube Live at some point. But we'll see. But anyway, Instagram, 2 p.m. Central on Friday, if you want to ask us questions. But one of the things we talked about last month in that realm was this idea of A-races and C-races. And the quote that I'll quickly lob in here and remind people of is one of my favorite quotes from a coach that I follow out of Colorado. His name is Alan Cousins. He talks about this idea that people race too many A-races and not enough C-races. Sorry, too many A-races and B-races and not enough C-races. The idea being that, you know, you can only peak a few times a year, so you should only be doing two to three max peak A-races a year. There's no such thing as a B-race, because all eggs should be either in an A-race basket or not in any basket at all. And not enough C-races means people don't do enough races without any pressure, without any context, just going to see what happens, or racing in a way that helps support their A-race. And that's where I think this kind of executional point comes in. I think there's not enough people taking just swings of the bat, where they're not worried about outcomes, they're just trying to learn how to execute. We've had some folks in our Rogue Renegade group do some C-races this season, probably more than I've ever observed from the group, that we're doing races just to practice race execution, and not necessarily pace execution. Some of it just to practice nutrition, or grabbing water from the water stops, and learning how to pinch the cup and take it in, and just practicing drinking on the run at certain paces. And I think that's a thing that's not kind of talked about enough, is where are we just taking fun swings of the bat to just learn some of these elements, so that when it all matters and it's all coming together, you're able to do it. So, you got to learn to execute the plan, create the plan, and then execute the plan. It's so much easier said than done, and takes many people years to really master it. So, that's number two, execute the plan. Number three, maybe the hardest on this list for today's episode, is we want you to race without fear of failure. We want you to race without fear of failure. There might be a lot of fears, and that's okay. You know, I love the Bernay Brown quote, where she talks about, fear and courage necessarily go together. You don't have courage without fear. I think a lot of times we think of courage as the absence of fear, but she reminds us in some of her great work, that fear and courage necessarily come together. Courage is the overcoming of fear. So, you're going to have a lot of fears around race day and anxieties and nerves and things that you're worried about, and those are all normal things. And they never go away, regardless of how experienced you are. I mean, I've done 150 plus races in my running career, and I still get nervous, and I still have fears and anxieties that I carry into race day. But you do become better at coping with those things. So, it's okay to have those things, those thoughts and fears, but then you want to name them, set them aside, and then focus on what you can do instead. But the one we try to get out of people is this idea of fearing failure. And I think, again, this is a whole episode unto itself, but part of it is the fact that there, I think part of it is there's just really no such thing as failure. If you keep trying, I like to emphasize with my athletes that there's no such thing as failure if you learn and if you get up and go again. Right?

Yep.

Because then it was just your last race. Failure is when you quit trying, essentially. So failure isn't a thing if you're learning, if you're taking lessons that you can assimilate to your next event, and if you fail, but quote fail, but get back up and try again. And so we want to try to not be worried about what if I don't get it. This idea that you're somehow defined by the outcomes, or that other people are going to look at you and say, well, you're a failure because you didn't get the time you wanted. It's just not real. First of all, most people don't care, but also, if you think about it individually, it's not a failure if you keep going. But this one's really hard. But it does allow you to unlock potential, I think, that you can't unlock otherwise.

Yeah. I don't know if... I almost feel like that's what we're up to. Like when I think long and hard about the entire distance running and training experience, it's sort of like, what are people up to? And there's a lot going on when we do them, right? Like, you know, we could dig into why I work, and everyone has their unique and specific why. But underneath it all, like somebody who originally just wanted to run a marathon, it was because, well, that distance at the time seemed scary, out of reach, far, right? And so it was like, I wonder if I can do that. Now, framing it that way, that's how I say it, because that's how I want athletes to think. But that doesn't sound like fear. But how could you say, I wonder if I could do it without kind of assuming that there is a possibility that I could fail, right? So I'm not necessarily saying that it's always quote like super fear based, but it's like, that's what made the goal worthy in the first place was that it was out of reach. And so I think that's why the first two points actually are so important, because we know that in this one, it's like fears do well up, because you're going after something that is quote out of reach. And so before we let you slip down into that mindset, we want you to A, focus on trust your training and have a plan, so that you have something to preoccupy yourself, so that you end up having that courageous and fighters kind of attitude. But ultimately, you don't get that feeling of satisfaction and meaning and purpose. Like, yes, I know what I'm doing actually matters and has value, i.e. you don't develop agency if you don't face the things that you fear. And so to me, and I know I'm making it psychological, but I can't ever remove, just like you can't remove fear and courage, it's like you can't remove the psychological from the physiological when it comes to the training and the racing that we do. It's like humans, yes, are hardwired for suffering and adversity. And maybe at one time it was the distance, now it's the distance at a certain pace. You're just upping the ante, but it's you doing that. You're inviting it in and that's what makes it beautiful actually. It's the voluntary adoption of the struggle and the rigor and the stress in the name of growth that makes this all special. Like how else do you find, quote, inherent value in what it is that we're up to? Because it's not just the distance. I was talking about this recently. I was like, there is no value inherently like in and of itself to the distance 26.2. Like the Queen of England decided she wanted to be able to see the race from her box. And so all of a sudden the marathon became 42K instead.

Yeah, 42.2.

Yeah, 42.2. So it's sort of like, okay, so we know that the number and the distance in and of itself wasn't what provides us the meaning, right? So what does provide us the meaning? I think what provides us the meaning, the purpose, the value is that it is somewhat scary because it's either so far you don't know if you can do it or you've set a goal to run so fast that far that that now feels out of reach. Either way, I think the fear component is what makes it actually special.

Yeah, we wouldn't do it if we knew we could get it.

Yeah.

Right. It wouldn't have the meaning that we would want it to have if it was easy.

It'd just be practice.

So we're looking for that edge. The other analogy or thought process I think about with this one is there's a, to me, and this is where, again, I think this was one where it's easier said than done. It's easier to say, well, yeah, I can race without fear of failure. But then you get into it and you have all these doubts and anxieties that come in and you start to think about, well, what if I don't get it and people will think I'm slow or people think I'm not good enough? And so it can overwhelm you. Or you can use it as your own negotiating tactic in the race where you're on the limit, it's getting hard and you think, oh, well, it doesn't matter, right? It doesn't matter. I'll just back off the pace because it doesn't matter. I know that there's no such thing as failure. And so we talk about kind of the yin and yang of running quite a bit. And I think there's a yin and yang of racing where nirvana, so to speak, is this place of one, wanting an outcome so badly and having a connection to the purpose of that, that you're willing to go for it and put it all out there for it, while simultaneously realizing that if you don't get it, it's okay. You move on to the next. You learn, you move on to the next. And in reaching that place, that nirvana, where those two are balanced appropriately, those two things, of wanting it so badly, that you're willing to give everything on race day to go for it, but also knowing in the back of your mind that it's okay if you don't get there. Those two things are really hard to balance, and then you shift one way or the other, and you give yourself it out, or an excuse. You know, if it's like, oh, I want it badly, but I know it will be fine if I don't get it, then you might quit on yourself early in the race. Or, you know, if you lean too heavily on that, it doesn't matter. You know, the outcome doesn't matter. Then maybe you never really give yourself a chance. So it's an interesting balance. Or, you know, you lean too heavily on the, I want it so badly that you beat yourself up on the other side if you don't get it, and that's not healthy either. So it's this really fine line. And I will say as somebody who's done a lot of racing, raced and run for a long time in training, it took me a very long time to, I feel like, get to, you probably never get to Nirvana on this one. There's always a little bit of, you know.

We never arrive.

We never arrive, but I feel like I'm pretty close to being able to approach a race with this mindset, where I can simultaneously want it as bad as possible to willing to put everything online while also knowing that if I don't get it, it's okay. Being able to process that loss and move on. But man, it's hard. And so to me, this is one that we'll talk about different elements of this as we go through the book. That is sort of a life pursuit. And it probably, for some people, might exist in the running space, but then carry over and exist in other spaces that they might occupy and perform in, work and relationships and otherwise. But if you can reach that nirvana, that perfect balance of those two things, then it's a really good place to be.

Yeah. You know, when you were talking about the athlete that might say, like, oh, if it's without failure, then they forget how you said it, but they might kind of toss in the towel or something, or like, oh, it's like, here's the thing. A, I think someone that might go down that pathway of thinking, it's like, they're, they don't train with us. No, I'm just kidding.

It's true. We have some badass folks in our crew.

Yeah. But what I was going to really say was that, like, here's the thing is, like, here's what that person would know, regardless of what happens on race day, regardless of whether they had fears or not, or regardless of whether they hit the end time or not. This is something that humans cannot escape. And we always know, even if we're not consciously thinking on it, and that's if we're actually trying our best. We all know that. We really do. We don't need some external voice or person or marker that someone created within a system to tell us whether or not we're trying our best. So, is it really sad, like if you're going for a Boston qualifier and you had been planning on it and now expectations are building, so that image creates in your mind and you're wanting and you're salivating? It's like, yes. Is all of that important? Yes, because that's part of your vision, and it's our vision that sustains us through the, quote, perilous journey, right? And so it's what gets us to do all the hard work. And so in some ways, it might feel like, yeah, exactly what I want is that sub four, or exactly what I want is that sub three, or exactly what I want is this Olympic trials qualifier, et cetera. But really, you want to A, know that you're doing your very best, and B, those standards fit this phrase here, and that's you want to know you're up for the damn challenge. Those are the reasons why I think we run deep, deep, deep, deep down. So again, I always encourage people to find their why, but it's like there's no, when you're thinking about, am I doing my best and am I up for the challenge, whatever my challenge is, all of a sudden those other kinds of considerations become like moot points, right? Like if you're thinking like, oh, to race without fear would be too, it's like, stop.

Well, we'll talk about it in one of the later principles, this idea that if you leave it all on the course, if you give your all, if you try your best, as you were saying, then you can claim victory no matter what the outcome was. I mean, I think about my Boston Marathon in 2016, I think it was, where I had to walk the last five miles. I had a stress fracture go over the edge in the race, went from a little twinge of a pain in my left heel at the first 5K to a pain that felt like either something was going to break or my Achilles was going to tear by the time I got over Heartbreak Hill. So I started walking to see if that would make it better and then tried to run again. And I had that distinct feeling that if I ran, I was going to make it worse. You know, just that that visceral in your body feeling like I can't run right now. If I do, it's going to be worse. So what did I do? I walked the last five miles of the Boston Marathon, got my personal worst marathon time in that race. But honestly, it's one of the races I'm most proud of. But some people might look at that on the outside and say, well, wasn't that a failure, Chris? I was really fit going for a PR that day, going for a massive Boston PR, ended up with a personal worst marathon time, walking the last five miles. And people would ask, well, wasn't that a failure, or don't you feel like you need redemption from that? And the answer is no, no, because I gave everything I had. That just happened to be what I had on that day. So I'm actually very proud of it because those were the cards that I was dealt, I played them, and that's all I could do. That's all my body could physically do. I would love to go back and train differently so that I didn't end up with that injury, which had not just training elements, but a few other variables that I'm sure we'll get to in depth as we go through this, but I gave everything I had. And so it's not a failure. I learned from it, learned from it both from my training perspective and my racing perspective, and now I would say it's one of my proudest marathons, because I did leave it all in the course, so to speak, even though it didn't look sexy doing it.

Yeah.

The other thing I want to mention here before we wrap is, I also like comparing running to other sports when it comes to the concept of quote failure, because if you think about something like skateboarding, or I was, for whatever reason, my Instagram algorithm got on people doing skimboarding.

Skimboarding? Like over in the ocean?

Yeah, like where you throw that little board, and then you skim into the waves and do stuff. And so, I don't know, at some point over the holidays, I clicked on one of those videos, and then your algorithm just starts feeding them to you. And so I was getting these clips of these pro skimboarders that are just doing crazy things, throwing that little board, and then sliding out to the surf, and then doing tricks. But for every one video they capture, there's like 100 where they just ate it, or where they didn't catch the board right, and they just sank, or they just fell off of it. And that's the same is true with skateboarders. You know, they might try a trick 100 times before they nail it. And they're not sitting there beating themselves up every time they fail, you know, or, quote, don't get the trick. And it just happens over and over, and they just sit there. And I've watched them here in Austin, at various places, just going for it, and they try to get that perfect trick, and they just miss, miss, miss, and sometimes they miss badly. And then they keep doing it, and then finally they catch it, and then that one perfect moment where they nailed the trick supplants every single one of the failed ones. And they just don't think about failure in the same way we do. I mean, part of it is because we get so many fewer Ed Bats at really going for it, and they can take 100, you know, in an hour. But to me, we need to have more of that mindset, that sort of skateboarder or surfer's mindset, where it's just, hey, it's just another race. Yeah, give it your all, have a plan, execute it to the best of your ability, see where the outcome lands. But if you don't get it, it's okay. Stand up, do the trick again, and see what happens.

You know what's crazy is I did not plan this at all, but everything you just said is basically, that's the meaning of this shirt. It says good. And I love this shirt, one, just because it's like the word goods on the front, so it's like maybe someone will smile when you're walking by. But it's from Jocko Willink, who wrote the book Extreme Ownership, was a Navy SEAL commander, highest ranking officer at the Battle of Ramadi. Anyway, he has this thing going with the word good, because when his guys call him and something goes wrong, they'll be like, I already know what you're going to tell me. He's like, what? You're going to tell me good? Because literally everything that goes bad, and for him, this is a Navy SEAL, so it's not a joke, right? And this is a really high order, like I've tried to live it, and I'm like, I can't be like Jaco all the time, but I can be like Jaco some of the time, right? And it's basically like, you know, you didn't get the job you wanted, good. Opportunity to get better at interviewing, right? You know, you didn't get the race result you wanted, good. Opportunity to like, reiterate your plan and train better next time. You know, you get the point. I won't keep going down analogies, and it's his talk track, so I want to respect that. But that's the spirit of this shirt. It's like, things didn't go your way, good. You know, like, find the good in it. And that kind of applies on the race without fear of failure. Also, it's sort of like, when you brought up that you like comparing it to other sports, I just talked about this yesterday with an athlete who's a former golfer, and I'm a former golfer, so I guess we're both lifelong golfers, but we were using that analogy. It's like, that's also the wrong thing to focus on. Like, as a golfer, we learn very fast. Like, if you are afraid of going into the sandbox and you think, don't go into the sandbox, don't go in the sandbox, don't go in the sandbox, your brain's telling your body, sandbox, sandbox, sandbox, and then bam! You focus on the green. You don't focus on the water, the sandbox. Like, yes, be aware of the traps, but you point your mind towards the thing that you're aiming at. So racing without fear of failure should actually be like, it's like, yes, like pick your target and aim at it. Like, just focus on what you're aimed at, right?

No, race, race as if the outcome is yours.

Yeah.

Basically. And it may not be that time, but it might be the next time or the next time. But this again, it's hard to do this one, but I think easier in context. And it just unlocks this freedom about racing and a freedom about overcoming it or being able to assimilate lessons and move on to the next. I think it's just really important. And that doesn't mean you don't feel the feels, as we like to say, when it doesn't go your way. Yeah, be bummed, be disappointed. Don't skip over those feelings. Nobody's saying that. But feel the feels, get them out of your system, and then move on to the next. We just don't want this idea of quote failure to be a debilitating one, because we've seen it happen for people where they're so afraid of what might happen if they don't get what they want, that they don't ever give themselves a chance. And that's what we're trying to help you avoid here, as we talk about this principle so early in the book. But that's number three for today. We've got three more. I think we're going to call this episode here, Part 1 on Racing Fundamentals. Again, three points we covered. Trust your training, number one. Two, execute the plan. So have a plan and execute your plan. And then three, race without fear of failure. We've got three more. We'll talk about next episode. A couple of reminders as we wrap this one. One, just want to hit the Instagram, 2 p.m. Friday, Instagram Live again at Rogue Running. You and I are there every week for the most part, minus some holidays, to answer questions. So you can jump on there with us, put your question in the comment, and we'll answer it as if we were your coach and help you the best we can. So jump on those if you haven't checked them out. Also, we're on YouTube now. So if you want to see these in video form for whatever reason, see our ugly mugs that way, then that's an option now. You can check us out at the Rogue Running YouTube, which is cool. Obviously, we're still on all of the audio podcast channels. And then the final point I'll mention before we wrap is just, this is a season for kicking off training, especially our virtual group training for those that are interested in that. We've got three different groups, depending on your experience and mileage levels. Basically something for everybody from that perspective, for those that are kind of beginning their journey. We have a group called Rogue Rising, appropriately named for those that want to rise up in their running journey. The Rogue Renegades, which is our middle group that covers the broadest spectrum of athletes that have been training for a little bit. They've got more than 40 miles a week under their belt or have been there before or already there. And then our Team Rogue Virtual Group that you and Kathy coach, that is for more experienced and higher mileage runners that are doing 55 plus. So, we've got an option for everybody. We're restarting our seasons right now as we speak. So, this is a perfect time to join any of those. You can check them out at roguerunning.com. Click on Train and then Virtual Group Training to find information on that. You can also always email us coaching at roguerunning.com if you want to get more info about that or any of our coaching options, including those here in person in Austin or in Dallas, or our virtual one-on-one coaching. So, go check all of those things out if you have any interest. And then, of course, grab a book. If you haven't picked one up, we're going to be going through it. You don't have to have one to follow along, but we think it'll make it more interesting if you do. And those links are in our Instagram bio at Rogue Running or my Instagram bio at Rogue Chris. So, I think that covers it. Am I missing anything?

No, I'm glad you brought up the virtual groups because I was thinking of that too. And I was like, our counterparts are amazing. So, one of us is on every group where either you or I are involved in, right? And then also it's like Coach Kathy Casey, Allison Maxis with you in the Renegades, Coach Kerry Dyer with me in Rogue Rising, UT Runner. I mean, it's like our counterparts are badasses as well.

For sure.

They just don't have time to join us on all these, but man, they're great.

Yeah, and the communities there are great too. I mean, the members in each of those groups, just so uplifting and knowledgeable. And I mean, you're going to make fast friends if you join any of them. And you won't have to do it on your own if that's what you're currently doing. So check any of those out. Otherwise, please, please keep coming back each week as we step through these episodes. I think we'll wrap this one here. Again, all of that stuff's at roguerunning.com. We're on our Instagram at Rogue Running. Until next time, we'll talk to you soon.